# Chapter 11: The Big Cycle Rise and Decline of the United States and the Dollar

Chapter 11: The Big Cycle Rise and Decline of the United States and the Dollar

**

## CHAPTER 11 THE BIG CYCLE RISE AND DECLINE OF THE UNITED STATES AND THE DOLLAR
This chapter covers the Big Cycle rise of the US beginning in the 19th century, its gradual surpassing of the UK as the world’s most powerful empire, and its recent decline. As the story of the US as the world’s leading empire is still unfolding and is highly relevant to the world today, I will be going through its Big Cycle in more detail than I did for the Dutch and British**, especially as it relates to the dollar’s status as a global reserve currency and the economic and monetary policy forces that have impacted it.

The chart on the next page shows the eight types of power that make up our overall US arc. **In them you can see the story behind the US’s rise and decline since 1700.** The strong development and excellence in education led to advances in innovation and technology, competitiveness in world markets, and economic output, all of which fueled the development of financial markets and the US as a financial center, its leadership in military strength and world trade, and, with a significant lag, the emergence of the dollar as a reserve currency. The relative advantages in education, competitiveness, and trade have fallen, while those in innovation and technology, reserve currency status, and financial markets and financial center status remain strong. **What this chart doesn’t show are the deviations in the** **US income and balance sheet conditions and its internal conflicts, both of which are more concerning.** (For a more complete current picture, see the final chapter of this book.)

*
This next chart combines all the factors to show the overall arc of the US from before the Revolutionary War, marking the key events along the way. The numbers mark the approximate times of the six stages of the internal order cycle.

Now we will go through the US’s story from the beginning until the time of my writing.

### THE RISE
As with all new countries and dynasties, **the US went through the usual revolution and post-revolution process in which it created a new domestic order as 1) a coordinated group of strong leaders fought to gain control, 2) that group won and consolidated control, 3) the new leadership had a vision supported by the population, but 4) it split into factions that had conflicts over how the government should work to implement that vision. Eventually, these factions 5) figured out the system for control and laid it out in agreements (in the US case, at first in the Articles of Confederation and then in the Constitution), 6) set up the parts of government (e.g., the money and credit system, the legal system, the legislative systems, the military, etc.), and 7) put people in jobs and made it work well.** The US did these things in a uniquely peaceful way through negotiations, near-total respect for agreements, and good designs for governance that gave it a great start.

In the chart showing the eight types of power, you can see that rapidly improving levels of education preceded the big rises in innovation, technology, and competitiveness, which lasted until the World Wars, with an interruption during the US Civil War. There were many ups and downs in both domestic and external money/debt, economic, and military circumstances. I won’t take you through them in detail, though I will note that all of them followed the archetypical patterns driven by the same basic cause/effect relationships previously described here. While the ascent of the US was most pronounced after World War II, it really started in the late 1800s. That’s where we’ll pick up the story.

**After the US Civil War came the Second Industrial Revolution, which was one of those classic times in which the peaceful pursuit of wealth and prosperity created great gains in incomes, technologies, and wealth in England, continental Europe, and the United States.**

**In the US, these gains were financed through a system of free-market capitalism that, as is classic, produced both lots of wealth and big wealth gaps.** These gaps led to discontent and Progressive Era policies that broke up rich and powerful monopolies (“trust busting”) and raised taxes on the rich, starting with the passage of a constitutional amendment to allow federal income taxes in 1913. The US’s increased strengths were reflected in its rising shares of global economic output and world trade, as well as its growing financial strength (exemplified by New York becoming the world’s leading financial center), continuing leadership in innovation, and great usage of its financial products.

#### The Long Ascent of the Dollar and US Capital Markets
The dollar’s path to being the world’s dominant reserve currency was far from straightforward. In the US’s first century of existence its financial system was completely underdeveloped. Banking worked in the United States in the classic ways it did in most countries, as I described in Chapters 3 and 4. In other words, hard money was put into banks that together lent out much more than they had. That Ponzi scheme unraveled, so banks failed to meet their commitments and devalued the money. The US had no central bank to control financial markets or act as a lender of last resort. **The US went through many boom/bust cycles, in which classically a flurry of debt-financed investments (into land, railroads, etc.) became overextended, leading to credit losses and a credit crunch. As a result, banking system panics were extremely common.** In New York alone, eight significant banking panics occurred between 1836 and 1913, and regional banking panics were also common. This was because the highly fragmented banking system had a rigid amount of currency, no deposit insurance, and a pyramidal reserve system (with a small number of large banks in New York serving as “correspondents” or holding reserves for a high percentage of the nation’s banks) that heightened the risk of contagion from one bank going under.

**Like London, New York was well-established as a trading center long before it became a global financial center, a development that didn’t occur until after the turn of the 20th century.** Only two US banks made the list of the top 20 largest global banks in 1913, at numbers 13 and 17. In comparison, British banks occupied nine slots, including three of the top five. For perspective, at this point the US was far larger than the UK in economic output, and they were neck and neck in export market share.

**Many of the most important financial innovations in the emerging New York financial center came out of its needs as a large trading center.** Investment banking took off in the US and emerged in the 1800s as a clearinghouse for capital—much of it flowing from Europe—to finance the US boom over the period. Like in London earlier, insurance companies developed more rapidly than banking; in the pre-war period the large insurance trusts were bigger than the large banks.

The fact that the US economy was more dynamic and rapidly changing compared to European and British markets was also reflected in the US stock market, which boomed starting right after the US Civil War. As previously explained, **the second half of the 19th century** **was a boom period of peace and prosperity that has been called “the Second Industrial Revolution,” “the Gilded Age,” and “the Robber Barron Era” because it was the period in which capitalism and innovation flourished, wealth gaps widened enormously, decadence was apparent, and resentment built**. The backlash started around 1900, and there was a classic debt bust in 1907. This turbulence led to the creation of the Federal Reserve central banking system in 1913. By 1910, US stock market capitalization had surpassed that of Great Britain. New sectors and companies rose to prominence quickly, such as US Steel, which was founded in 1901 and became the most valuable US company only 15 years later.

**Then World War I, the war few people expected to happen and nobody expected to last so long, began in 1914 and ended in 1918.** The US was not in World War I for most of it and was the only major country to maintain convertibility to gold during the war. Not only were the economies and markets of Europe badly hurt from the wartime efforts, but the policies undertaken by European governments also further undermined the faith in their currencies. In contrast, the United States’ relative financial and economic position benefited from the war. That the Allies’ wartime debts were largely owed to the US boosted the use of the dollar for denominating global government debt.

**Following the standard script, the winning powers—in this case the US, Britain, France, Japan, and Italy—met after the war to set out the new world order. That meeting, called the Paris Peace Conference, took place in early 1919, lasted for six months, and led to the Treaty of Versailles.** In that treaty, the territories of the losing powers (Germany, Austria-Hungary, the Ottoman Empire, and Bulgaria) were carved up and put under the control of the winning empires. The losing powers were put into deep debt to the winning powers to repay the winning countries’ war costs. These debts were payable in gold.

Geopolitically, the United States also benefited because it played a key role in shaping the new world order, though it remained more isolationist while Britain continued to expand and oversee its global colonial empire. The monetary system in the immediate post-war period was in flux. While most countries endeavored to restore gold convertibility, currency stability against gold came only after a period of sharp devaluations and inflation.

**As is typical, after the war years and with the new world order came a period of peace and prosperity fueled by great innovations and productivity and a capital markets boom that produced big debts and big wealth gaps late in the upswing. In the Roaring ’20s a lot of debt (promises to deliver paper money that was convertible to gold) was created to buy speculative assets (particularly stocks). To curtail that, the Federal Reserve tightened monetary policy in 1929, which caused the bubble to burst and the global Great Depression to begin. It brought economic suffering to virtually all nations, which led to fighting over wealth within and between countries, which led to the hot wars that began a decade later.**

I covered the events leading up to and during World War II in depth in Chapter 6 as an example of the war period of the big external order/disorder cycle. The important thing to remember here is that the Allied victory in 1945 produced the next shift in the world order. It was a tremendous shift of wealth and power. **On a relative basis the US came out the big winner because the US sold and lent a lot before and during the war, basically all of the fighting took place off of US territory so the US wasn’t physically damaged, and US deaths were comparatively low in relation to those of most other major countries.**

### THE TOP
#### The Post-War Geopolitical and Military System
**Following the standard script, the victorious powers met to determine the new world order and its new money and credit systems.**

The US, Russia (then the USSR), and Great Britain emerged from the fighting as the world’s great powers with the US clearly the richest and most powerful militarily. Germany, Japan, and Italy were largely destroyed; Great Britain was essentially bankrupt, and France was devastated by the war and contributed little to the victory. China was in civil war, which resumed right after Japan’s surrender. **While there was relatively good cooperation between the US and Russia immediately after the war, it didn’t take long for the two greatest powers with opposing ideologies to enter a “cold” war.** The next chart shows the aggregate power indices for the US, the UK, Russia, and China since the end of World War II. As you can see, Russia rose relative to the US until 1980 but it was never nearly as powerful, though it was much more powerful than China. After 1980, Russia began its decline while China then began its rapid ascent and the US continued its gradual decline.

The split between the US- and Russian-controlled blocs had been clear from the outset. President Harry Truman outlined what is now referred to as the Truman Doctrine in a March 1947 speech:

**
Every nation must choose between alternative ways of life. The choice is too often not a free one. One way of life is based upon the will of the majority, and is distinguished by free institutions, representative government, free elections, guarantees of individual liberty, freedom of speech and religion, and freedom from political oppression. The second way of life is based upon the will of a minority forcibly imposed upon the majority. It relies upon terror and oppression, a controlled press and radio, fixed elections, and the suppression of personal freedoms. I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.

As I explained in Chapter 6, compared to domestic governance,  international relations are driven much more by raw power dynamics.* That is because there are laws and standards of behavior within countries, whereas between them raw power matters most, and laws, rules, and even mutually agreed-upon treaties and organizations for arbitration (such as the League of Nations, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization) don’t matter much. That is what makes having a strong military and strong military alliances so important.** In 1949, 12 countries in the US camp (with more joining later) formed the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) military alliance, and in 1954 the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) was established among the US, the UK, Australia, France, New Zealand, the Philippines, Thailand, and Pakistan. Eight countries in the Soviet camp formed the Warsaw Pact in 1955.

**As shown in the following chart, the Americans and Soviets invested massively in building up their nuclear weapons and a number of other countries followed.** Today, 11 countries have nuclear weapons or are on the brink of having them, in varying amounts and degrees of capability. Having nuclear weapons obviously gives one a big negotiating chip in the world power game, so it’s understandable why some countries would want to have them and other countries would not want other countries to have them. While there have been no nuclear wars, the US has fought a number of conventional wars since World War II, most notably the Korean War in the 1950s, the Vietnam War in the 1960s and 1970s, the two Gulf Wars in 1990 and 2003, and the War in Afghanistan from 2001 to 2021. These were costly in terms of money, lives, and public support for the United States. Were they worth it? That’s for others to decide. For the Soviet Union, which had a much smaller and weaker economy than the US, spending enough to compete with the US militarily and maintain its empire pushed it into bankruptcy.

*
Of course, military power consists of a lot more than nuclear weapons and a lot has changed since the Cold War. While I’m no military expert, I get to speak to some who have led me to believe that, while the US remains the strongest military power overall, it is not dominant in all parts of the world in all ways, and military challenges to it are rising. There is a significant chance that the US would lose wars against China and Russia in their geographic areas of strength—or at least would be unacceptably harmed—and it could also be unacceptably harmed by some second-tier powers too. This is not the good ol’ days of right after 1945 when the US was the sole dominant power. While there are a number of high-risk scenarios, in my opinion, the most worrying is a forceful move by China to bring Taiwan under its control.

What will the next high-stakes military conflict look like? Because of new technologies, it will be very different from previous ones. Classically the country that wins wars spends more, invests more, and outlasts the opposition. But it is a delicate balance.

Because spending on the military takes government money away from spending on social programs, and because military technologies go hand in hand with private sector technologies, the biggest military risk for the leading powers is that they lose the economic and technology wars.*

In dealings between countries the transactions are more at arm’s length. That means it is less easy to make the currency artificially cheap, harming the holders of it, so internationally traded currencies are more likely to be better value currencies. This is relevant when currencies are a storehold of wealth in the form of debt denominated in them. Sometimes there is too much debt around the world and it is in all governments’ interests to devalue their currencies. At such times gold (and recently digital currencies) can be preferable. Also at such times governments are more likely to outlaw these alternative currencies, though they can’t fully outlaw them. When the money and credit systems based on fiat currencies break down, it eventually leads to hard money monetary systems.

#### The Post-War Monetary and Economic Systems
**As for the new post-war monetary and economic systems, there was one for the US-led camp and one for the Soviet-led camp**, though there were also some nonaligned countries that had their own nonaligned currencies that were not widely accepted. Representatives of 44 countries gathered in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in 1944 to make a monetary system that linked the dollar to gold and other country’s currencies to the dollar. The Soviet Union’s system was built around the ruble, which nobody wanted. * Transactions between countries are very different from transactions within countries.* Governments want to control the money that is used within their borders because by increasing and decreasing its supply, its cost of borrowing, and its value the government has enormous power.

Because money and economics are so important I want to return to the subject, revisiting how the system works and is working. In the post-war monetary system, within countries, people and companies used the government-controlled paper money. **When they wanted to buy something from another country, they typically exchanged their own country’s paper currency for the other country’s paper currency with the help of their central bank that settled with the other country’s central bank in gold.** If they were American, they paid in dollars and the seller from another country either exchanged them at their central bank for the local currency or held on to them believing that they were better storeholds of wealth than their own money. The results were that gold left the US central bank’s reserve account and went into the accounts of other country’s central bank and dollars accumulated abroad.

**As a result of the Bretton Woods Agreement, the dollar became the world’s leading reserve currency. This was natural because the two World Wars had made the US the richest and most powerful country by far.** By the end of World War II the US had amassed its greatest gold/money savings ever—about two-thirds of all the government-held gold/money in the world, the equivalent to eight years of import purchases. Even after the war, it continued to earn a lot of money by exporting.

**The economies of Europe and Japan had been destroyed by the war. As a solution, and to fight the spread of communism, the US supplied them with massive aid packages (known as the Marshall and Dodge plans), which were a) good for these devastated nations, b) good for the US economically because these countries used the money to buy US goods, c) good for the US’s geopolitical influence, and d) good for reinforcing the dollar’s position as the world’s dominant reserve currency.**

As for monetary policy, from 1933 until 1951, the amount of money, the cost of money (i.e., interest rates), and where that money went was controlled by the Federal Reserve to serve the greater objectives of the country rather than the free market.1 More specifically, the Fed printed a lot of money to buy debt, capped interest rates that lenders could charge, and controlled what money was allowed to go into, so high inflation did not drive interest rates to unacceptable heights and government regulations prevented other investment options from becoming much more attractive than the debt the government wanted people to save in. **Following a brief post-war recession that was due to the decline of military spending, the US entered a prolonged period of peace and prosperity as is typical when a new Big Cycle begins.**

The post-war recession saw the unemployment rate double (to around 4 percent), as around 20 million people needed to find employment outside of the military and other adjacent jobs. But at the same time, the removal of rationing laws, which had limited people’s ability to buy consumer goods, fueled a consumer spending surge. Cheap mortgages were also available for veterans, which led to a housing boom. The return to profit-making activities raised the demand for labor, so employment rebounded very quickly. Exports were strong because the Marshall and Dodge plans fueled foreign appetite for US goods; also the US private sector went global and invested abroad from 1945 through the 1970s. Stocks were cheap and dividend yields were high; the result was a multidecade bull market that reinforced New York’s dominance as the world’s financial center, bringing in still more investment and further strengthening the dollar as a reserve currency. All of this was classic; it was a mutually self-reinforcing Big Cycle upswing.

**There was enough money for the US to improve education, invent fabulous technologies (e.g., those that allowed it to go to the moon), and a lot more. The stock market hit its high in 1966, which marked the end of the good times for 16 years, though nobody knew it then.** That was around the time that my own direct contact with events began. I started investing in 1961 at age 12. Of course, I didn’t know what I was doing and had no appreciation for how lucky my contemporaries and I were. I was born at the right time and in the right place. The United States was the leading manufacturing country, so labor was valuable. Most adults could get a good job, and their kids could get a college education and rise without limitation. Since the majority of people were middle class, the majority of people were happy.

The US did all the classic things that helped the world become more dollarized. Its banks increased their operations and lending in foreign markets. In 1965, only 13 US banks had foreign branches. By 1970, 79 banks had them, and by 1980 nearly every major US bank had at least one foreign branch, and the total number of branches had grown to 787. Global lending boomed. However, as is also typical, a) those who prospered overdid things by operating financially imprudently while b) global competition, especially from Germany and Japan, increased. As a result, American lending and America’s finances began to deteriorate as its trade surpluses disappeared.

**Americans never thought about how much the space program, the War on Poverty, and the Vietnam War would cost. Because they felt so rich and the dollar seemed secure as a reserve currency Americans assumed they could afford a “guns and butter” fiscal policy indefinitely.** As the 1960s came to a close, real GDP growth was near 0 percent, inflation was around 6 percent, the short-term government interest rate was around 8 percent, and unemployment was around 4 percent. During this decade, US stocks returned 8 percent on an annual basis while bonds trailed, with equity-volatility-matched bonds returning -3 percent annually. The official gold price remained fixed in dollar terms, with some modest market price appreciation later in the decade, and commodities continued to be weak, returning 1 percent annually.

#### The 1970s: The Balance of Payments Problem Unfolds—Low Growth, High Inflation
As explained in Chapter 3, when claims on hard money (i.e., notes or paper money) are introduced, at first there is the same number of claims on the hard money as there is hard money in the bank. However, the holders of the paper claims and the banks soon discover the wonders of credit and debt. Debt holders like it because they can lend these paper claims to the bank in exchange for an interest payment so they get interest. The banks that borrow it from them like it because they can lend the money to others, who pay a higher interest rate so the banks make a profit. Those who borrow the money from the bank like it because it gives them buying power that they didn’t have. And the whole society likes it because asset prices and productivity rise.

After 1945, foreign central banks had the option of holding interest-rate-paying debt or holding non-interest-rate-earning gold. Because dollar-denominated debt was considered as good as gold, was convertible to gold, and was higher-earning because it provided interest, central banks shrank their gold holdings relative to their dollar-denominated debt holdings from 1945 until 1971. **As explained in Chapter 4, investors making such a move is a classic behavior and ends when a) the claims on the real money (i.e., gold) substantially exceed the amount of real money in the bank and b) one can see that the amount of real money in the bank (i.e., gold reserves) is going down. That is when no interest rate can be high enough for it to make sense to hold the debt (i.e., claims on the hard money) rather than to turn one’s paper money in for gold. At that time a run on the bank occurs and a default and debt restructuring have to happen. That is what led to the breakdown of the gold-linked Bretton Woods monetary system.**

As inflation accelerated and the economy weakened in 1969–70, the Fed could not afford to maintain a tight monetary policy, so the US’s balance of payments worsened and the dollar took a nosedive. Rather than running surpluses, the US ran unsustainably huge balance of payments deficits (i.e., the US bought more from the rest of the world than it sold to the rest of the world). In the summer of 1971, Americans traveling in Europe had difficulty exchanging their dollars for German marks, French francs, and British pounds. **The Nixon administration vowed not to “devalue” the dollar, but in August 1971, the US defaulted on its commitments to pay in gold, offering paper money instead.** Money and credit growth were no longer constrained, and the decade of stagflation had begun. At the same time, other industrialized countries had regained their economic strength, becoming very competitive in the world markets.

**Rather than seeing these problems as signs of things to come, Americans viewed them as nothing more than a temporary setback. Yet as the decade progressed, economic problems contributed** **to political problems and vice versa.** The Vietnam War and the Watergate affair dragged on, and there were OPEC-induced oil price increases and drought-induced food price hikes. As costs rose, Americans borrowed more in order to maintain their lifestyles, and the Fed allowed accelerated money supply growth to accommodate the high borrowing and prevent unacceptably high interest rates.

The dollars these deficits produced went to countries that were running budget surpluses, which deposited them in American banks, which lent them to Latin American and other emerging, commodity-producing countries. Savings and loan associations borrowed short to make longer-term mortgages and other loans, using the positive spread between short rates (which they borrowed at) and long rates (which they lent at) as a source of profits. Inflation and its effects on markets came in two big waves that were bracketed by periods of extreme monetary tightness, steep stock market declines, and deep recessions. **Early in the 1970s, most Americans had never experienced inflation, so they weren’t wary of it and allowed it to blossom. By the end of the decade, they were traumatized by it and assumed that it would never go away.**

By the end of the 1970s real GDP growth was around 2 percent, inflation was around 14 percent, short-term interest rates were around 13 percent, and unemployment was around 6 percent. Over the decade, gold surged and commodities kept up with rising inflation, returning around 30 percent and 15 percent on an annualized basis, respectively. But the high rate of inflation wiped out the modest 5 percent annual nominal return for stocks and 4 percent return for treasuries matched to equity volatility.

#### The Post-Bretton Woods System
**After the 1971 delinking of the dollar and other currencies from gold, the world moved to an unanchored fiat monetary system (or, Type 3, as I explained in Chapter 3) and the dollar fell in value against gold, other currencies, stocks, and eventually just about everything.** The new monetary system was negotiated by the leading economic policy makers of the United States, Germany, and Japan.2 Paul Volcker was Nixon’s undersecretary of international monetary affairs when Nixon severed the link with gold, and he was head of the Federal Reserve from 1979 until 1987. He did more to shape and guide the dollar-based monetary system before, during, and after these years than anyone. I was lucky enough to know him well so I can personally attest that he was a person of great character, capabilities, influence, and humility—a classic hero/role model in a world that lacks hero/role models, especially in economic public service. I believe that he and his thinking deserve to be studied more.

**I remember the inflation psychology of that time very well; it led Americans to borrow money and immediately take their paychecks to buy things to “get ahead of inflation.”** They also bought things that you couldn’t make more of, like gold and waterfront properties. The panic out of dollar debt also led interest rates to rise and drove the gold price from the $35 that it was fixed at in 1944 and officially stayed at until 1971 to $850 in 1980.

While most people didn’t understand how the money and credit dynamic worked, they felt the pain of it in the form of high inflation and high interest rates, so it was a chronic political issue. At the same time, there was a lot of conflict and rebellion due to the war in Vietnam, oil embargoes that led to high gas prices and gas rationing, labor union fights with companies over wages and benefits, Watergate and the Nixon impeachment, etc. These problems peaked in the late 1970s when 52 Americans were held hostage for 444 days at the US Embassy in Tehran. Americans felt that the country was falling apart. But what most Americans didn’t understand was that economic conditions in communist countries were even worse.

**As we’ll see in the next chapter, Mao Zedong’s death in 1976 brought Deng Xiaoping to power in a China that was stumbling economically and facing internal conflict. Deng’s market reforms** **led to a shift in economic policies that included capitalist elements like private ownership of businesses, the development of debt and equities markets, entrepreneurial technological and commercial innovations, and even the flourishing of billionaire capitalists—all under the strict control of the Chinese Communist Party. This shift in leadership and approaches, while seemingly insignificant at the time, would germinate into the biggest single force to shape the 21st century.**

#### The 1979–1982 Move to Tight Money and Conservatism
President Jimmy Carter, who like most political leaders didn’t understand the monetary mechanics very well, knew that something had to be done to stop inflation and appointed a strong monetary policy maker (Volcker) as head of the Federal Reserve in August 1979. In October 1979, **Volcker announced that he would constrain money (M1) growth at 5.5 percent.** I ran the numbers, which led me to figure that, if he really did what he said he was going to do, there would be a great shortage of money that would send interest rates through the roof, bankrupting debtors who could not get the credit they needed to cover their debt-service expenses. Volcker stuck to the plan despite great political backlash, driving interest rates to the highest levels seen “since Jesus Christ,” according to German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt.

**In the 1980 presidential election Carter was voted out and Ronald Reagan, who was perceived as a conservative who would impose discipline where it was needed, was elected. Leading countries at the time (reflected in the G7, which consisted of the US, the UK, Germany, Japan, France, Italy, and Canada—which shows how different the world power balance was 40 years ago versus today) made analogous moves in electing conservatives to bring discipline to their inflationary chaos.** Early in their terms, both Reagan in the US and Margaret Thatcher in the UK had landmark fights with labor unions.

* Economics and politics have swings between the left and the right in varying extremes as the excesses of each become intolerable and the memories of the problems of the other fade.* **It’s like fashion—the widths of ties and the lengths of skirts change through time. When there is great popularity of one extreme, one should expect that it won’t be too long before there will be a comparable move in the opposite direction.** The move to monetary tightness broke the backs of debtors and curtailed borrowing, which drove the world economy into its worst downturn since the Great Depression. The Federal Reserve slowly started to cut interest rates, but the markets continued to decline. Then Mexico defaulted on its debt in August 1982. Interestingly, the US stock market rallied in response.

What happened next created a jarringly painful learning experience for me. While I was able to anticipate the debt crisis, which was profitable for me, it also led me a) to anticipate a debt-default-triggered depression that never came and b) to lose a lot of money betting on it. As a result of my personal losses and the losses of clients, I had to let everyone in my fledgling company, Bridgewater Associates, go and was so broke I had to borrow $4,000 from my dad to help pay my family’s bills. At the same time this was one of the best things that ever happened to me because it changed my whole approach to decision making. What I had missed was that when debts are in the currencies that central banks have the ability to print and restructure, debt crises can be well-managed so they are not systemically threatening. Because the Federal Reserve could provide money to the banks that made the loans that weren’t being paid back, they didn’t have a cash flow problem, and because the American accounting system didn’t require the banks to account for these bad debts as losses, there was no big problem that couldn’t be worked out. I learned that **the value of assets is the reciprocal of the value of money and credit (i.e., the cheaper money and credit are, the more expensive asset prices are) and the value of** **money is the reciprocal of the quantity of it in existence, so when central banks are producing a lot of money and credit and making it cheaper, it is wise to be more aggressive in owning assets.**

#### The Disinflationary and Booming 1980s
In the 1980s there was a stock market and economic boom that was accompanied by falling inflation and falling interest rates in the United States at the same time as there were inflationary depressions in the debt-burdened emerging economies that didn’t have central banks to bail them out. The debt-restructuring process progressed slowly from 1982 until 1989 when an agreement called the Brady Plan, named after Nicholas Brady, who was the US Treasury secretary at the time, was created and started to bring an end to the “lost decade” in these countries (as agreements were reached with different countries through the early ’90s). **This whole 1971–91 up-and-down debt cycle, which profoundly affected just about everyone in the world, was the result of the US going off the gold standard, the inflation that followed it, and having to break the back of the inflation through tight monetary policies that led to the strength in the dollar and the dramatic fall in inflation.** In the markets that big cycle showed up via a) the soaring of inflation and inflation-hedge assets and bear markets in bonds in the 1970s, b) the 1979–81 bone-crushing monetary tightening that made cash the best investment and led to a lot of deflationary debt restructuring by non-American debtors, and then c) falling inflation rates and excellent performance of bonds, stocks, and other disinflationary assets in the 1980s. The following charts convey this very well, as they show the swings up and down in dollar-denominated inflation rates and interest rates from 1945 to the present. One needs to keep these moves and the mechanics behind them in mind when thinking about the future.

*
Through it all, the dollar remained the world’s leading reserve currency. The entire period was a forceful demonstration of the benefits to the US of having the currency that most of the world’s debts are denominated in.

#### 1990–2008: Globalizing, Digitalizing, and Booming Financed by Debt
**Because of its economic failures, the Soviet Union could not afford to support a) its empire, b) its economy, and c) its military in the face of Reagan’s arms-race spending.** As a result, the Soviet Union broke down in 1991. It was apparent that communism had failed or was failing everywhere, so many countries moved away from it and the world entered a very prosperous period of globalization and free-market capitalism.

**Since then, three economic cycles have brought us to where we are at the time of my writing—one that peaked in the 2000 dot-com bubble that led to the recession that followed, one that peaked in the 2007 bubble that led to the 2008 global financial crisis, and one that peaked in 2019, just before the 2020 coronavirus-triggered downturn. In addition to the decline of the Soviet Union,** **this period also saw the rise of China, globalization, and advances in technologies that replaced people, which was good for corporate profits but widened wealth and opportunity gaps.**

Countries and their borders faded in importance; goods and the incomes they produced were generally made wherever they could be most cost-effectively produced, which led to production and development in emerging countries, accelerating mobility of people between countries, narrowing wealth gaps between countries, and ballooning wealth gaps within them. Lower- and middle-income workers in developed countries suffered, while workers in productive emerging countries saw big relative gains. Though a bit of an oversimplification, it’s accurate to say that **this was a period in which workers in other countries, especially those in China, and machines replaced middle-class workers in the United States**.

The following chart shows the balances of goods and services3 for the United States and China since 1990 in real (i.e., inflation-adjusted) dollars. As you will see when we look at China in the next chapter, China’s economic reforms and open-door policies after Deng Xiaoping came to power in 1978 and China’s being welcomed into the World Trade Organization in 2001 led to an explosion of Chinese competitiveness and exports. Note the accelerations in Chinese surpluses and the US deficits from around 2000 to around 2010 and then some narrowing of these differences (which have recently ticked up during the pandemic), with China still tending to run surpluses and the US still running deficits. These surpluses have given China big savings that are a great financial power.

Most people pay attention to what they get and not where the money comes from to pay for it, so there are strong motivations for elected officials to spend a lot of borrowed money and make a lot of promises to give voters what they want and to take on debt and non-debt liabilities that cause problems down the road.* That was certainly the case in the 1990–2008 period.

Throughout the long-term debt cycle, from 1945 until 2008, whenever the Federal Reserve wanted the economy to pick up it would lower interest rates and make money and credit more available, which would increase stock and bond prices and increase demand. That was how it was done until 2008—i.e., interest rates were cut, and debts were increased faster than incomes to create unsustainable bubbles. That changed when the bubble burst in 2008 and interest rates hit 0 percent for the first time since the Great Depression. As explained more comprehensively in my book *Principles for Navigating Big Debt Crises* there are three types of monetary policy: 1) interest-rate-driven monetary policy (which I call Monetary Policy 1 because it is the first to be used and is the preferable way to run monetary policy), 2) printing money and buying financial assets, most importantly bonds (which I call Monetary Policy 2 and is now popularly called “quantitative easing”), and 3) coordination between fiscal policy and monetary policy in which the central government does a lot of debt-financed spending and the central bank buys that debt (which I call Monetary Policy 3 because it is the third and last approach to be used when the first two cease to be effective). The next charts show how the debt crises of 1933 and 2008 both led to interest rates hitting 0 percent and were followed by big money printing by the Federal Reserve.

*
**This change in monetary policy had big effects and implications.**

#### The 2008–2020 Money-Financed Capitalist Boom
**In 2008 the debt crisis led to interest rates being lowered until they hit 0 percent**, which led the three main reserve currency central banks (led by the Fed) to move from an interest-rate-driven monetary policy to a monetary policy of printing money and buying financial assets. Central banks printed money and bought financial assets, which put money in the hands of investors who bought other financial assets, which caused financial asset prices to rise, which was helpful for the economy and particularly beneficial to those who were rich enough to own financial assets, so it increased the wealth gap. Basically, borrowed money was essentially free, so investment borrowers and corporate borrowers took advantage of this to get it and used it to make purchases that drove stock prices and corporate profits up. This money did not trickle down proportionately, so wealth and income gaps continued to grow. Wealth and income gaps grew to the largest since the 1930–45 period.

**In 2016, Donald Trump, a blunt-speaking businessman and capitalist/populist of the right, led a revolt against establishment politicians and “elites” to get elected president by promising to support people with conservative values who had lost jobs and were struggling.** He went on to cut corporate taxes and run big budget deficits that the Fed accommodated. While this debt growth financed relatively strong market-economy growth and created some improvements for lower-income earners, it was accompanied by a further widening of the wealth and values gap, leading the “have-nots” to become increasingly resentful of the “haves.” **At the same time, the political gap grew with increasingly extreme Republicans on the one side and increasingly extreme Democrats on the other.** This is reflected in the next two charts. The first one shows how conservative Republicans in the Senate and House and how liberal Democrats in the Senate and House have become relative to the past. Based on this measure they have become more extreme, and their divergence has become larger than ever before. While I’m not sure that’s exactly right, I think it’s by and large right.

The next chart shows the percentage of votes along party lines for the average representative, which is the highest ever. This continues to be reflected in the reduced willingness to cross party lines to compromise and reach agreements. In other words, the political splits in the country have become deep and intransigent.

**Trump took a more aggressive negotiating posture concerning economic and geopolitical disagreements with international rivals, particularly China and Iran, and allies such as Europe and Japan regarding trade and paying for military expenditures.** The conflicts with China over trade, technology, geopolitics, and capital were intensifying as his term ended in 2021; economic sanctions such as those that were used in the 1930–45 period were being used or put on the table for possible use.

**In March 2020 the coronavirus pandemic hit, and incomes, employment, and economic activity plunged as the country (and much of the world) went into lockdown. The US government took on a lot of debt to give people and companies a lot of money, and the Federal Reserve printed a lot of money and bought a lot of debt. So did other central banks.** As a reflection of this, the following charts show the unemployment rates and central bank balance sheets of major countries for as far back as data is available. As shown, all the levels of central banks’ printing of money and buying of financial assets rose to near or beyond the previous record amounts in the war years.

**As history has shown and as explained in Chapter 4,**  when there is a great increase in money and credit, it drives down the value of money and credit, which drives up the value of other investment assets.*

The printing and buying of debt that the Fed undertook in 2020 was much like Roosevelt’s March 1933 move, Nixon’s August 1971 move, Volcker’s August 1982 move, Ben Bernanke’s November 2008 move, and Mario Draghi’s July 2012 move. It has become standard operating procedure for central banks, and it will persist until it no longer works.

### WHERE THE US IS NOW IN ITS BIG CYCLE
**The stats in my model suggest that the US is roughly 70 percent through its Big Cycle, plus or minus 10 percent. The United States has not yet crossed the line into the sixth phase of a civil war/revolution, when the active fighting begins, but internal conflict is high and rising.** The recent elections show how split the country is—almost 50/50, along seemingly irreconcilable lines.

The next graphic represents what the population looked like 50 years ago—i.e., the majority of each party were moderates and the extremists were less extreme.

*
Now it looks like this—i.e., with a greater concentration and number of people at the extremes.

4
History has shown us that  greater polarization equals either* *a) greater* *risk of political gridlock, which reduces the chances of revolutionary changes that rectify the problems or b) some form of civil war/revolution.*

In Chapter 5, I described the classic markers signaling the probabilities of escalation from Stage 5 to Stage 6. **The three most important markers I am watching now are: 1) the rules being disregarded, 2) both sides emotionally attacking each other, and 3) blood being spilled.**

In the final chapter of this book, I will share the quantitative measures that I use to track how things are going. I will continue to watch these and share what I’m seeing with you at economicprinciples.org. But first, we will look at a rising world power, China, and the ways in which it is coming into conflict with the US.

1 While 1933 to 1951 was the period from the Roosevelt peg break to the Monetary Accord between the Federal Reserve and Treasury, the policy of explicit yield curve control, in which the Federal Reserve controlled the spread between short-term and long-term interest rates, lasted from 1942 to 1947.

2 If you want to read a great description of this process of figuring out how to go from the old monetary system to the new fiat one, I recommend *Changing Fortunes* by Paul Volcker and Toyoo Gyohten.

3 This measures whether the country as a whole is spending more than it’s earning.

4 Shading indicates degree of polarization.