# Chapter 12: The Big Cycle Rise of China and the Renminbi

Chapter 12: The Big Cycle Rise of China and the Renminbi

**

## CHAPTER 12 THE BIG CYCLE RISE OF CHINA AND THE RENMINBI
Emotions have been running so high between the US and China that many people have urged me not to publish this chapter. We are in a kind of war, they say; any complimentary things you write about China will alienate US readers, while criticism of China will infuriate the Chinese—and the media will make things worse by distorting everything you say. That’s probably true, but I can’t not speak openly because the US-China relationship is too important to be left unmentioned by anyone who knows both countries as well as I do. To not speak honestly would cost me my self-respect.

I’m not afraid of criticism; I welcome it. What I am passing along here is just the latest iteration of my learning process, which is to develop my perspectives through direct experiences and research, to write up what I learn, to stress test it by showing it to smart people, to explore our differences if and when we have them, to evolve my thinking some more, and do that over and over again until I die. While this study reflects nearly 40 years of doing just that with China, it is still incomplete; it is right and wrong in ways that have yet to be discovered, and it is provided to you to use or criticize in the spirit of finding out what’s true.

This chapter is focused on China and Chinese history; the** **following chapter is on US-China relations.** What I hope to provide in this chapter is a better understanding of where the Chinese are coming from—of how they see us and themselves as a result of having lived through their history. While I’m not a scholar of Chinese culture and the Chinese way of operating, I believe that my numerous direct encounters with China, my historical and economic research, and my US and global perspective give me a unique sense of its past and present. After you read this, you can decide for yourself whether or not that’s true.

**China’s culture, by which I mean its people’s innate expectations about how families and communities should behave with each other and how leaders should lead and followers should follow, evolved over thousands of years through the rises and falls of its many ruling dynasties and the development of Confucian and Neo-Confucian philosophy as well as other beliefs. I have seen these typical Chinese values and ways of operating manifested over and over again**; for example, in the economic and leadership approaches of two men: Lee Kuan Yew, the former long-time prime minister of Singapore, and Deng Xiaoping, who initiated China’s reform and opening up. Both combined Confucian values with capitalist practices, in Deng’s case creating a “socialist market economy with Chinese characteristics.”

**Over the last couple of years, as part of my study of the rises and declines of empires and their currencies, I have also undertaken a study of Chinese history to help me understand how the Chinese think—especially their leaders, who are greatly influenced by history. I began my research with the year 600, just before the Tang Dynasty.**1 While I can be pretty certain about my impressions of the people and things that I have had direct contact with, I of course can’t be as certain about those I haven’t. My thoughts about historical figures such as Mao Zedong are based on facts gathered, experts’ thinking gathered from conversations and books, and conjecture. What I can say is that between my own experience, the efforts of my research team, and my extensive triangulation with some of the most knowledgeable China scholars and practitioners on the planet, I have a high degree of confidence in my conclusions.

Since my first trip to China in 1984, I have come to know many Chinese, from the lowest to the highest in rank, in an up-close, personal way, and I have experienced their recent history as directly as I have experienced America’s. As a result, I believe that I understand both the American and Chinese perspectives pretty well. I urge those of you who haven’t spent considerable time in China to look past the caricatured pictures that are often painted by biased parties and rid yourself of any stereotypes you might have that are based on what you thought you knew about the old “communist China”—because they’re wrong. Triangulate whatever you are hearing or reading with people who have spent a lot of time in China working with the Chinese people. As an aside, I think the widespread media distortions and the blind and near-violent loyalties that stand in the way of the thoughtful exploration of our different perspectives are a frightening sign of our times.

To be clear, I’m not ideological. I don’t choose a side on an issue based on whether it aligns with American, Chinese, or my own personal beliefs. I’m practical; I approach things like a doctor who relies on logic and cause/effect relationships and believes in what works well through time. The only thing I can do is beg for your patience and open-mindedness as I share what I’ve learned with you.

I laid out the factors that I believe are most important to a country’s health when I discussed the 18 determinants at the beginning of this book. Of those, I highlighted eight measures of power: education, competitiveness, innovation/technology, trade, economic output, military, financial center status, and reserve currency status. When I judge China’s strengths and weaknesses, it is through the lens of those factors. I also try to understand China’s circumstances as the Chinese themselves do, through their eyes.

**To refresh your memory, this chart shows the relative standing of the world’s leading countries as measured in indices that measure eight different types of power**. In examining the rises and declines of the great empires since 1500, I looked at each of these measures. I will now do the same for China, briefly conveying the long arc of its history while diving into its highlights in a more granular way.

*
**Breaking this rise down further, the following chart shows the eight measures of power for China between 1800 and the present.**

**Unlike the cycles for the Dutch, British, and American empires, which began with their rises and were followed by their protracted declines, China’s cycle over the past 200 years was a long decline followed by a rapid rise. Though the order is reversed, the same forces drove the cycle. Seven of the eight powers hit their lowest points in the 1940–50 period. Since then, most of them—notably, economic competitiveness, education, and military power—improved gradually until around 1980, when China’s economic competitiveness and trade took off. That was right after Deng Xiaoping’s open-door and reform policies began. That is no coincidence. From my first visit to China in 1984 until about 2008, debt growth was in line with economic growth, which was very strong.** In other words, extremely rapid improvements were made without loading the economy up with debt. Then the 2008 financial crisis came along and China, like the rest of the world, used a lot of debt to stimulate its economy, so debts rose relative to incomes. When Xi Jinping came to power in 2012, he improved China’s debt and economic management dramatically, continued growth in innovation and technologies, strengthened education and the military, and encountered greater conflict with the US. **China is now roughly tied with the US in being the leading power in trade, economic output, and innovation and technology, and it is a strong and quickly rising military and educational power. It is an emerging power in the financial sector but is lagging as a reserve currency and financial center. We will explore all of this in more detail later in the chapter, but in order to understand China’s present we first need to wade into its tremendous history.**

### CHINA’S GIANT HISTORY IN A TINY NUTSHELL
Anyone who wants to have a fundamental understanding of China needs to know the basics of its history, the many patterns that repeat within it, and the timeless and universal principles that its leaders have gained from studying those patterns. Getting even a basic understanding of Chinese history is a considerable undertaking. Spanning some 4,000 years, it is so vast and complicated, and has inspired so many different and sometimes contradictory interpretations, that I am confident that there is no single source of truth—and I am especially confident that I’m not it. Still, there is a lot that knowledgeable people agree on, and many scholars and practitioners, both Chinese and non-Chinese, have shared valuable insights with me. Trying to piece together all that I have learned has not only been a valuable experience for me but also a fascinating one. While I can’t guarantee that my perspectives are the best, I can guarantee that they have been well-triangulated with some of the most informed people in the world.

China’s civilization began around 2000 BCE with the Xia Dynasty, which lasted about 400 years and is credited with bringing the Bronze Age to Asia. Confucius, who developed the philosophy that most influences how the Chinese behave with each other to this day, lived from 551 to 479 BCE. The Qin Dynasty united most of the geographic area that we now call China around 221 BCE and was followed by the 400-year Han Dynasty, which pioneered governance systems that are still in use. The Tang Dynasty came to the fore in 618 CE.

**This chart applies to China the same overall power gauge that I showed you in the chart of great empires, covering the more than 1,400 years between 600 and today. With the notable exception of the period from around 1840 to 1950, when it experienced a steep decline, China has historically stood among the most powerful empires in the world. As it emerged from civil war, it began to rise again, at first slowly and then very rapidly. Today it is second only to the US and is poised to surpass it.**

Most of the dynasties that ruled China over the course of this time span were as cultured as they were powerful. (I only name the most prominent in the chart; there were many others.) Each of these dynasties has its own fascinating story, but to do those stories justice would take far more space than can fit in this chapter.

**The Tang Dynasty (618–907) is considered by many Chinese to be a high point of Imperial China.** The Tang came to power after a prolonged period of disunion and civil war, which had culminated in China being reunified by the short-lived Sui Dynasty, which immediately preceded the Tang. The dynasty was established by a father-son pair of strong leaders—with the son, the Tang’s second Emperor Taizong, being especially notable. They not only militarily unified China, but also established a stable government system and policies that were highly effective, producing quality education, excellent development of technologies, international trade, and diverse ideas. Taizong was a great revolutionary leader who was able to consolidate power, build a great dynasty, and transition well so that the dynasty remained strong without him. A period of great prosperity lasted about 150 years, with a particularly strong military that helped the Tang control valuable trade routes in Central Asia. By the late 700s, however, the Tang slipped into decline for the classic reasons: the quality of governance fell, fragmentation over economic and values gaps led to a weakened and corrupt central government (which, combined with internal conflict, led to a series of rebellions), its finances deteriorated, and natural disasters increased in impact.
**Then came the Northern and Southern Song dynasties (960–1279), during which China was the most innovative and dynamic economy in the world.** The deterioration of the Tang Dynasty led to its own period of civil war and disunion in the 900s. Out of this conflict the Song Dynasty came to power under the rule of Emperor Taizu in 960. Taizu was one of those classic strong revolutionary leaders who needed to and could bring order to chaos. He successfully rose to power as a military leader and, when in power, implemented widespread reforms to a) bring together the different factions that had previously fought for power, b) create a centralized, top-down system of military and civilian governance, and c) expand education and the quality of governance (particularly through reforming the imperial examination system). These investments in education and meritocracy under Taizu and his successors set the Song Dynasty on the classic good path that led to immense scientific and technological advancement.2 However, after a few generations, around the year 1100, the dynasty declined due to a combination of weak leadership, financial problems, and other classic factors. In its weakened state, it became vulnerable to external powers. During the 1100s and 1200s, the Song first lost control of the northern half of China, then, after a revival period known as the Southern Song Dynasty, were conquered by Mongol leader Kublai Khan.
**Kublai Khan founded the comparatively short-lived Yuan Dynasty (1279–1368).** For much of his rule, Kublai Khan governed well and behaved like a classic dynastic founder: he encouraged education, unified the state, and, relative to many other Mongol leaders, stood out for his meritocratic and open-minded style of governing. Under Kublai Khan, China’s economy and trade strengthened after a long period of conflict. At the same time, the Yuan pursued expensive wars of conquest. Corruption grew later in his rule, and the failure to establish a stable succession structure led to frequent civil wars and crises after his death. This corruption and instability helped produce rebellions that ended the dynasty after less than a century.
**The Ming Dynasty (1368–1644) presided over an empire that was largely prosperous and peaceful. It was founded by the Hongwu Emperor, who was born into poverty and rose to be a great general who captured Beijing and threw out the Mongol rulers. He consolidated power in a 14-year purge that led to about 30,000 executions.** After winning power through a successful rebellion against the unpopular Yuan Dynasty, early Ming leaders built a meritocratic society with excellent education and civil behavior that fostered innovation. Over time the Ming Dynasty expanded trade with Europe (as Chinese goods were of superior quality), which brought in enormous amounts of silver and redirected the nation’s energies from subsistence agriculture to industry. However, the Ming’s failure to manage monetary and fiscal policy well, to consistently support China’s influence over international trade, and to adequately respond to a series of crises left China exposed and vulnerable. To make matters worse, the Little Ice Age led to agricultural disaster and famine. In the end, war, famine, and ecological disaster—combined with a rigid and ineffectual state—created an unrecoverable catastrophe that led to the collapse of the nearly three-centuries-old Ming Dynasty by 1644.
**The Qing Dynasty (1644–1912) came to power when the neighboring Manchu people capitalized on instability and rebellions in Ming China to challenge it.** This culminated in the sacking of Beijing by rebels during which the last Ming emperor committed suicide. **Then the cycle began again under the Qing Dynasty. China achieved its maximum territorial expansion, governing over a third of the world’s population while reforms under the reigns of three long-ruling emperors led to an extended period of economic prosperity.**3 Then the European powers arrived. Earlier in this book we saw how the European powers, in the Age of Exploration, used their military strength to trade with and exploit resource-rich but militarily weaker foreigners. That’s what happened starting in the early 1800s, which began what is called the Century of Humiliation in China. The Europeans came offering to trade but the Chinese didn’t want anything they had to offer. This led to the British bringing opium into China to get the Chinese addicted, so that they would trade for it. A series of military confrontations followed during the 1800s (most notably the Opium Wars), which sped China’s decline. Chinese moves to stem their decline failed and there was great internal conflict and uprisings (most notably the Taiping Rebellion), which continued until the collapse of the Qing Dynasty in 1912.

The lessons this history provides remain very much in the forefront of the minds of China’s current leaders and are fascinating to me, especially in the context of the patterns of history.

#### How the Typical Dynastic Cycle Transpires
The typical major Chinese dynasty, like the typical empire, lasted about 250 years, give or take 150 years, and by and large followed the same pattern of rises and declines.4 You can especially see the internal order cycle, described in Chapter 5, at play time and time again. As a reminder of that cycle:

**Stage 1, when the new order begins and the new leadership consolidates power**, which leads to…
… **Stage 2, when the resource-allocation systems and government bureaucracies are built and refined**, which if done well leads to…
… **Stage 3, when there is peace and prosperity**, which leads to…
… **Stage 4, when there are great excesses in spending and debt and the widening of wealth and political gaps**, which leads to…
… **Stage 5, when there are very bad financial conditions** **and intense conflict**, which leads to…
… **Stage 6, when there are civil wars/revolutions**, which leads to…
… Stage 1, which leads to Stage 2, etc., with the whole cycle happening over again.

Let’s review this cycle quickly. **The typical cycle begins with strong leaders who win control and implement improvements needed to build a great empire**. As with most other empires, the initial winning of the war for control is typically followed by **struggling to get most of the population in line and united** (often through conflict to establish the leadership’s power). That is typically followed by a peace that is due to no entities wanting to challenge the dominant power (Stage 1).

Then the new ruler turns to building up the empire. To be successful an empire needs **a smart and determined population that works well with each other**. It also needs to be **strong financially**. These things are obtained by systems that train and produce people who have **strong education and self-discipline. Getting the most capable people into the most important roles requires the meritocratic selection of people. In Chinese dynasties, the imperial exams often played that role, and it was common for new dynasties to implement educational reforms.** It also requires **an effective resource-allocation system** (Stage 2).

During that period of peace and rising power, the empire typically works well economically and improves its financial condition. While the empire typically starts with limited financial resources and low debts because the previous empire’s debts have been wiped out, in some cases it has assets that were acquired as an outcome of the prior war that it won. In the case of Chinese history, key variables were the distribution of land ownership and taxation of it—often the arrival of a new dynasty weakened or overturned the “corrupt elites” of the prior system, vastly improving the resources available to the state. With these resources, the dynasty profits and expands. It builds commercial, technological, and military strengths that reinforce each other. For example, having strong technologies helps the dynasty economically and militarily because they can be used for both purposes and because being strong militarily protects the country’s commercial interests (e.g., protects trade routes), which also strengthens the dynasty financially. At its peak, the dynasty’s government is functioning well, its resources and people are employed productively, and prior investments are yielding new gains. The economy is strong and self-sustaining, and the people are prosperous and produce great achievements in scholarship, the arts, trade, architecture, and other elements of great civilizations (Stage 3).

The decline of the empire typically happens because the forces that strengthened it fade and a rival power emerges. Leadership weakens, often becomes corrupt, and/or allows corruption in others.5 Also, the dynasty typically becomes overextended and quite often becomes heavily indebted, which causes it to have debt problems that are typically dealt with by printing lots of money, which in turn devalues the money. The dynasty’s population also becomes increasingly fragmented and loses its unity of purpose and ability to work well together. The wealth gap increases, which undermines productivity and leads to political conflict. Often there is some form of natural disaster, frequently a drought or a flood that exacerbates the dynasty’s problems. The more of these that happen at the same time, the greater the chance that the dynasty will fall.

The fall itself comes with escalating rebellions and then a bloody civil war (Stage 5 and Stage 6). Eventually a strong new leader emerges, wins the conflict, and begins the cycle again with a new dynasty (Stage 1 again).

There are **common themes in the decline of the different dynasties—themes also visible in the decline of some of the other powers mentioned in this book**:

**1. Growing inequality and fiscal problems over the course of the dynasty are critical drivers of the decline.** Dynasties often started with more equal land and wealth holdings, as the concentrated holdings of the old dynasty’s elites were redistributed—which helped with preventing social conflict and helped the fiscal position (because elites often were more able to shelter themselves from taxes than the broader base of small landholders). But over the years, land became concentrated in fewer and fewer families, who could evade taxes (via bribery, using official influence, and finding other ways to hide/shelter their wealth from taxation)—which in turn allowed them to build their wealth further. The inequality this produced helped directly spawn conflict, and the weakening tax base of the state made the state weaker and more vulnerable to crisis.
**2. Monetary problems were common contributors to the decline of the empires.** In the Song, Yuan, and Ming dynasties, the government struggled to maintain a large enough money supply in metal coins and resorted to money printing, especially in times of war and natural or human-caused disaster. The problems with collecting taxes made the incentive to print even stronger. This caused high inflation or hyperinflation, making matters worse.
**3. The quality of governance and infrastructure tended to rise early in each dynasty and then fall over the course of the dynasty.** Later in the Song, Ming, and Qing dynasties, years of underinvestment in public works built up, leaving China vulnerable to famines and floods. And while it’s hard to generalize over dozens of emperors, the visionary founder of the dynasty (e.g., the founders of the Song and Yuan dynasties who embraced technology and science) was typically succeeded by rulers who were more rigid and conservative (e.g., in the Qing Dynasty), too focused on imperial riches and luxuries (e.g., the last rulers of the Northern Song Dynasty), and/or less supportive of foreign trade (in the Ming Dynasty).
**4. Internal conflict usually arose from economic differences combined with bad times (most typically caused by agricultural problems, high debts, poor governance, and natural disasters, and sometimes by conflicts with outside forces).** Significant natural disasters and periods of quick climate change that were painfully disruptive often coincided with the fall of dynasties. The classic downward spiral has been that 1) inadequate technology and investment (both new projects and maintenance) leaves infrastructure susceptible to natural disasters; 2) a disaster hits (in China’s case this was typically via droughts and flooding from the major rivers), which damages crop yields and, in some cases, destroys communities, as lower crop yields lead to food scarcity and famine; and 3) domestic populist uprisings result from the disasters. This process played a significant role in the declines of the Song, Yuan, Ming, and Qing dynasties.
**5. Bad conditions and large wealth gaps led to the most significant uprisings**, which were due to the common man rebelling against the excesses of the elite (e.g., the Fang La Rebellion in the Song Dynasty, the Red Turban Rebellion in the Yuan Dynasty, and the White Lotus Rebellion in the Qing Dynasty). Conversely, domestic stability arising from good conditions for most people was a key characteristic of the more prosperous periods.
**6. Isolation and Confucian cultural influences that favored scholarship over commerce, technology, and military strength led to China’s weaker competitiveness in business, technology, and the military, which led it to be beaten by or fall behind stronger “barbarians”—e.g., the Mongols, the foreign powers in the Opium Wars, and the rest of the world in the Mao isolation period.**

**China’s physical geography and geology have also had a big impact on the rise and fall of dynasties.** The main thing to know is that China’s terrain is varied and often volatile. For example, the north is colder, flatter, and drier, and the south is more mountainous, much warmer, and wetter, which leads to China’s different areas having often inconsistent crop production. However, a united China is largely self-contained because the diversification and coordination of the parts make it that way. Still, these conditions plus shortages of clean water, cropland, and coastal marine fisheries have historically made China vulnerable to food shortages. For that reason, **China has often been food-insecure** and even today imports a lot of food. **China also has shortages of important natural resources**, such as oil, some minerals, and some foodstuffs. **It also has bad air pollution that adversely affects the health of its people and its agriculture, though it is quickly improving these conditions.**

Such events led **past and current leaders of China to learn lessons and establish protections against these natural and political disasters** being repeated or leading to unacceptable consequences. In other words, there are many lessons embedded in these histories, and—believe me—all of them influence the decision making of China’s leaders today, whether they are planning for the long term or dealing with cases at hand.

What is especially interesting to me is seeing how far back in history the patterns of the archetypical Big Cycle go, since China’s history is both so ancient and so well-documented. I was also fascinated to see what happened when the Eastern and Western worlds interacted more significantly from the 17th through the 19th centuries, and how, as the world became much smaller and more interconnected, the Chinese and Western Big Cycles affected each other.

Probably the most important thing I gained from studying the history of so many countries is the ability to see the big patterns of causes and effects. Shifting my perspective to the very long term felt like zooming out in Google Maps because it allowed me to see contours that I couldn’t see before and how the same stories play out over and over again for basically the same reasons. I also came to understand how having so much history to study has affected the Chinese way of thinking, which is very different from the American way of thinking, which is much more focused on what is happening now. Most Americans believe their own history is just 300 or 400 years old (since they believe the country began with European settlement), and they aren’t terribly interested in learning from it.

Whether they are interested or not, 300 years seems like a very long time ago to Americans, but for the Chinese, it isn’t long at all. While the prospect of a revolution or a war that will overturn the US system is unimaginable to most Americans, both seem inevitable to the Chinese because they have seen those things happen again and again and have studied the patterns that inevitably precede them. While most Americans focus on particular events, especially those that are happening now, most Chinese leaders view current events in the context of larger, more evolutionary patterns.

Americans are impulsive and tactical; they fight for what they want in the present. Most Chinese are strategic; they plan for how they can get what they want in the future. I have also found Chinese leaders to be much more philosophical (literally, readers of philosophy) than American leaders. For example, I had a meeting with a Chinese leader who had just met President Donald Trump and had concerns about the possibility of a US-China conflict. He explained how he approached the meeting, which struck me as starkly different from how President Trump likely had. This leader and I have known each other for many years, during which time we have talked mostly about the Chinese and world economies and markets. Over those years we have developed a friendship. He is a very skilled, wise, humble, and likable man. He explained that going into his meeting with Trump, he was concerned about the worst-case scenario where tit-for-tat escalations could get out of control and lead to war. He referred to history and gave a personal story of his father to convey his perspective that wars were so unimaginably harmful and the damage of the next war could be worse than the last war, which had killed more people than any other. He focused on World War I as an example. He said that to calm himself down and gain equanimity he read Critique of Pure* *Reason* by Immanuel Kant, and he realized that he could only do his best and then the outcomes would take their course. I told him about the Serenity Prayer6 and suggested meditation to him. I went home and read *Critique of Pure Reason* again, which I found challenging. I did, and still do, admire him and value his perspective greatly.

I tell this story to share with you one Chinese leader’s perspective on the risk of wars and to also give one example of the many interactions I’ve had with this leader and of the many interactions I’ve had with many Chinese leaders and Chinese people in order to help you see them through my eyes and through their eyes.

**Chinese history and philosophy, most importantly Confucian/Taoist/legalist/Marxist philosophies, have a much bigger influence on Chinese thinking than American history and its Judeo-Christian/European philosophical roots have on American thinking.** An esteemed Chinese historian told me that Mao read the mammoth 20-volume chronicle *Comprehensive Mirror for Aid in Government*, which covers the 16 dynasties and 1,400 years of Chinese history from around 400 BCE to 960 CE, and the even more mammoth *Twenty-Four Histories* several times, as well as numerous volumes about Chinese history and the writings of non-Chinese philosophers, most importantly Marx. He also wrote and spoke philosophically, wrote poetry, and practiced calligraphy. If you are interested in what Mao thought or, more importantly, how he thought, I suggest you read *On Practice, On Contradiction*, and of course *The Little Red Book*, which is a compendium of his quotations on a number of subjects.7

**The planning horizon that Chinese leaders concern themselves with is well over a century because that’s at least how long a good dynasty lasts. They understand that the typical arc of development has different multidecade phases in it, which they plan for.**

The first phase of the current Chinese Empire occurred under Mao when the revolution took place, control of the country was won, and power and institutions were solidified. The second phase of building wealth, power, and cohesiveness without threatening the leading world power (i.e., the United States) occurred under Deng and his successors up to Xi. The third phase of building on these accomplishments and moving China toward where it has set out to be on the 100th anniversary of the People’s Republic of China in 2049—which is to be a “modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced, and harmonious”—is occurring under Xi and his successors. **Its ultimate goal is to make the Chinese economy about twice the size of the US’s and to have the benefits of its growth broadly shared.**8 Nearer-term goals and ways to achieve them were set out in the Made in China 2025 plan,9 Xi’s new China Standards Plan 2035, and the usual five-year plans.10

**Chinese leaders don’t just try to implement their plans; they set out clear metrics by which to judge their performance, and they achieve most of their goals.** I’m not saying that this process is perfect because it isn’t, and I’m not saying that they don’t have political and other challenges that lead to disagreements, including some brutal fights over what should be done, because they do (in private). What I am saying is that the Chinese have much longer-term and historically based perspectives and planning horizons, which they break down into shorter-term plans and ways of operating, and they have done an excellent job of achieving what they have set out to do by following this approach. Coincidentally, my own search for patterns in history and my way of dealing with tactical decisions has had a similar effect on how I see and do things—e.g., I now view the last 500 years as recent history, the most relevant historical arcs seem about 100-plus years long, and the patterns I’ve gleaned from this perspective help me anticipate how events are likely to transpire, and how I should be positioned for them over the coming weeks, months, and years.

### CHINA’S LESSONS AND ITS WAYS OF OPERATING
Chinese culture developed as an extension of the experiences the Chinese had and the lessons they learned from them over the course of millennia. These were set out in philosophies about how things work and what ways work best in dealing with those realities, which made clear how people should be with each other, how political decision making should be done, and how economic systems should work. In the Western world, the dominant philosophies are Judeo-Christian, democratic, and capitalist/socialist, and each individual pretty much chooses from them to come up with a mix that suits them. In China, the main philosophies were Confucian, Taoist, and legalist until the early 20th century, when Marxism and capitalism entered the mix. Emperors typically choose their own preferences, put them into practice, learn, and adapt. If the mix works, the dynasty survives and prospers (in their parlance, it has the “mandate of heaven”). If it doesn’t, it fails and is replaced by another. This process has gone on from before history was recorded and will go on for as long as there are people who have to decide how to do things collectively.

While I can’t do these philosophies justice in a couple of sentences, here are my attempts:

**Confucianism seeks to bring about harmony by ensuring that people know their roles in the hierarchy and how to play them well**, starting from within the family (between the husband and the wife, the father and the son, the older sibling and the younger sibling, etc.) and extending up to the ruler and their subjects. Each person respects and obeys those above them, who are benevolent and at the same time impose strict standards of behavior. All people are expected to be kind, honest, and fair. Confucianism values harmony, broad-based education, and meritocracy.
**Legalism favors the rapid conquest and unification of “everything under heaven” by an autocratic leader.** It argues that the world is a kill-or-be-killed jungle in which strict obedience to the emperor’s central government is required, without much benevolence given in return. The Western equivalent of legalism is fascism.
**Taoism teaches that it is of paramount importance to live in harmony with the laws of nature**. Taoists believe that nature is composed of opposites—yin and yang—and that harmony is achieved when they are balanced well.

Until the early 20th century, when Marxism gained favor with Mao and his successors, Confucianism and Neo-Confucianism were the most influential philosophies, usually with some legalism thrown in. I will briefly explain Marxism when we get into the 20th century.

**All of these Chinese systems are hierarchical and nonegalitarian.** Wang Qishan, the vice president of China and a remarkable historian and explorer of different cultures, told me that the core difference between Americans and the Chinese is that Americans hold the individual above all else while the Chinese put the family and the collective above everything. **America is run from the bottom up (e.g., democracy) and optimized for the individual; China is run from the top down and optimized for the collective.** The Chinese word “country” consists of the two characters for “state” and “family,” he explained, so Chinese leaders seek to run their state the way they think parents should run their families, with each person knowing their place and having filial respect for those above them. As a result, the Chinese are more humble, respectful, and rules-bound, while Americans are more arrogant, egalitarian, and rules-averse. I’ve observed that while the Chinese are more interested in asking questions and learning, Americans are more interested in telling you what they think.

As for governance structure (i.e., who reports to whom within the hierarchy of the central government and how that extends down to interactions with regional and local governments), the Chinese have evolved well-developed approaches over many dynasties and thousands of years; to go into them in depth would require too great a digression.

Unlike other great empires that have conquered and occupied other countries, it was relatively uncommon for China to occupy distant states. **China is basically a giant plain surrounded by big natural borders (mountains and seas), with the bulk of its population spread across the plain. Most of China’s world was confined within those borders, and most of its wars were fought for control of it, mostly among the Chinese, though sometimes between foreign invaders and the Chinese.**

**Traditional Chinese military philosophy teaches that the ideal way to win a war is not by fighting but by quietly developing one’s power to the point that simply displaying it will cause an opponent to capitulate.** It also calls for the extensive use of psychology to influence opponents’ behaviors.11 **Still, there have been numerous violent dynastic wars inside China. The few wars that were fought outside China were for the purpose of establishing China’s relative power and opening trade.**

Scholars believe that China was loathe to expand its empire because its land mass was already so large and difficult to control and because they have preferred to maintain a cultural purity that is best achieved through isolation. **Traditionally the Chinese have preferred to enter into relations with empires outside their borders in a manner that is similar to what one might expect from the previously mentioned philosophies—i.e., with the parties knowing their** **places and acting accordingly.** If China was more powerful, which was typically the case, the less powerful states paid “tribute” with gifts and favors and typically received guarantees of peace, recognition of their authorities, and trading opportunities in return. These subordinate countries typically maintained their customs and experienced no interference in how their countries were run.12

### CHINA’S MONETARY AND ECONOMIC HISTORY
**As for money, credit, and the economy, the history is very long and complicated. That said, China has gone through the full range of money/credit/economic systems and cycles that I described earlier when discussing the big cycle of money and credit.** The currency the Chinese used the most was metal (mostly copper coins, and some silver, domestically), which continued long after China invented paper money in the 9th century, until the introduction of the yuan in the late 19th century. Silver was the main currency used internationally, though gold was also sometimes used.

Understanding the different systems is especially important for China, as they shifted frequently between them and it helped produce prosperity or ruin in different periods, depending on how the system was managed. China experienced several cycles of 1) transitioning from hard currency to paper backed by hard currency (Type 1 to Type 2), then 2) seeing trust in the currency increase until the paper currency was circulated with no backing, (Type 2 to Type 3), then 3) having the paper currency collapse due to overprinting and loss of faith, leading to the return to a hard currency (Type 3 to Type 1).

As I explained in Chapter 3 there are three basic types of monetary systems. In the first, which I call a Type 1 monetary system, money has intrinsic value (because the coins are made from gold, silver, and copper). In the second, which I call a Type 2 monetary system, money is linked to assets that have intrinsic value (typically in the form of paper notes that can be exchanged for gold or silver at a fixed price). In a Type 3 (or fiat) monetary system, money is not linked to anything objective. The following diagram conveys an ultra-simplified picture of how these currency systems rotated throughout China’s history since the Tang Dynasty. In fact, different parts of China had different currencies and at times used coins and ingots from other countries (e.g., Spanish silver dollars in the late 16th century). Still **the diagram is broadly indicative and meant to show that China had the same range of monetary systems as the rest of the world, and they worked in essentially the same ways, most importantly, with cycles in which hard money was abandoned due to debt problems, leading to inflation, hyperinflation, and finally a return to hard money**.

*13
At the start of the Tang Dynasty, money primarily consisted of copper coins (i.e., hard currency). But as is classic, the supply of hard currency proved to be constraining—China was growing quickly, and the supply of copper wasn’t keeping up to provide enough money. Additionally, each copper coin was of low value, and so to trade, merchants had to physically carry perhaps hundreds of thousands of copper coins, which was impractical. These pressures led to the invention of the earliest forms of non-hard, money-like instruments. “Flying cash” started out as essentially drafts from a bank (like checks), but merchants would circulate them like money. Eventually, the Tang government started to supervise their issuance and use.14 That said, day-to-day monetary transactions continued to be mainly in copper coinage.

True paper money (i.e., designed to be in widespread use as legal tender) came a bit later in Chinese history. In the early 1100s during the Song Dynasty, the government took over the money-making industry and created the first commodity-backed paper money. The paper money soon was accepted and what it was backed by took on a subordinate importance. Thus began an early version of a fiat monetary system. However, similar to bonds, the paper money had a maturity date, after which it was retired.

The Song Dynasty not only invented fiat money, they also were the first to overprint and devalue paper money. By the mid-1100s the financial demands on the Song treasury were extremely high, due to foreign wars and domestic revolts. As is quite typical of the declines of empires, rather than increasing taxes or cutting spending, which they didn’t want to do because it would have increased discontent, they printed fiat currency to fund their deficits. Initially, the monetization of deficits was manageable—the first fiat currency, known as huizi notes, was issued in modest quantities starting in 1160 and traded at near face value for more than 30 years. But the Song government soon printed more freely, more than tripling the amount of huizi in circulation. As internal and external conflicts continued to strain the imperial treasury, the money supply nearly tripled again between 1209 and 1231. As a result, the market value of that paper money (measured in specie coins) fell by over 90 percent between 1195 and the 1230s.

The same patterns repeated several more times. The Yuan Dynasty, feeling constrained by metal currency, created a new paper currency (which Marco Polo marveled at), but then overprinted it, causing the currency to eventually collapse. The early Ming Dynasty, also feeling constrained by metal currency, created paper money to provide funds to establish a new state, but then overprinted it, eventually causing the currency to collapse. These are fascinating stories I won’t delve into now.

Following the failure of fiat money at the start of the Ming Dynasty, China gave up experimentation with paper currencies until the 20th century. Instead, from the mid-14th century to around 1933, China had different types of metal coins, primarily silver. The intrinsic value of that silver constituted the significant majority of their value, though there was some premium placed on the coins themselves. For a major portion of that time, largely up until 1933, China didn’t mint, and the coins came first from Spain, then Mexico, then North America. In 1933, the Chinese chose to create their own national coinage, which began to circulate. Two years later, the Chinese government decided to replace the yuan with the fabi (which means “legal tender”), in order to move from a currency they couldn’t print to one they could. The fabi in turn experienced increasingly rampant hyperinflation due to overprinting by the Republic of China government in World War II and the final phases of the Chinese Civil War that followed. Following the foundation of the People’s Republic of China (PRC), the renminbi was introduced and remains in use to this day.

As for China’s broader economy, it went from being primarily agricultural and feudal through a variety of manufacturing incarnations, such as the Bronze Age and the Iron Age, and developed various approaches to trading with foreigners (most importantly through the Silk Road). This gave rise to a rich merchant class, producing cycles in which big wealth gaps developed followed by uprisings in which their wealth was seized. Since China has always been an intelligent and industrious society, numerous technological inventions moved its economy forward. Private entrepreneurial businesses also arose at different times in China’s history, producing cycles in which wealth disparities grew, until governments expropriated and redistributed wealth in countless ways. China experienced debt cycles like those described in Chapter 3 as well, which took place for the same reasons. There were stable periods within these big debt cycles when debt growth wasn’t excessive; bubble periods when it was; crisis periods when there wasn’t enough money to service debt; and inflationary (and sometimes hyperinflationary) periods when money was printed to alleviate the debt crises.

It’s interesting to note that while the most powerful empires had global reserve currencies, this has not been true for China’s most powerful dynasties.

That is because:

In the years prior to frequent oceanic travel, there was no such thing as a global reserve currency (trade was limited and generally conducted in precious metals), and throughout its history, China never became such an extensive empire (i.e., a “world power”) that a large portion of the world wanted to transact with and hold its promissory notes as storeholds of wealth. China never established a financial center rivaling those in Europe, and it was much less commercial. While China was ahead in financial market development in the Song Dynasty (establishing the first stock companies and using paper currency), by the 1600s financial/capital market developments in China were far behind those in Europe. Culturally, being commercial was not held in high regard by China’s leaders so there was less development of the commercial legal system and the financial markets. Because of that lesser commercial development and its more isolationist policies, China generally fell behind Europe in terms of innovation, which we will discuss later.
Further, China’s support for private commerce and financial markets was inconsistent—stronger in the Song and Tang periods and then more hostile in the Ming and Qing, when global trade empires were first being established. As a result, the social and legal structures were less conducive to capital accumulation/investment (e.g., corporate law was much less developed than in Europe and Chinese businesses tended to be family-owned). Also, the state overall was less willing and able to invest in strategic industries or push innovation. Confucian ideology probably played a role in this, as merchants/businesspeople were of lower status compared to scholars, a viewpoint that strengthened as more conservative strains of Confucianism gained sway in the Ming and Qing dynasties.

Debt grew dramatically during the civil unrest and wars of the 1920s and ’30s, which led to the classic cycle in which promises to deliver money far exceed capacities to do so. This caused widespread defaults, which classically led to the abandonment of the metal standard and the outlawing of metal coins and private ownership of silver. As previously explained, **currencies are used for 1) domestic transactions, which the government has a monopoly in controlling (and hence can be carried out with fiat or even flimflam currencies) and 2) international transactions, in which case the currencies must be of real value or they won’t be accepted. The test of the real value of a currency is whether it is actively used and traded at the same exchange rate internationally as domestically. When there are capital controls that prevent the free exchange of a domestic currency internationally, that currency is more susceptible to being devalued. By definition reserve currencies have no such controls. So, as a principle:**  when you see capital controls being put on a currency, especially when there is a big domestic debt problem, run from that currency.*

China had two currencies in the 1930s—a fiat paper one for domestic transactions, and a gold one for international payments. The fiat paper one was printed abundantly and frequently devalued. After the turbulence of World War II and the Chinese Civil War, in December 1948, the first renminbi was issued as a fiat currency and it was kept in limited supply to end the hyperinflation. In 1955, a second issuance of renminbi was made, and in 1962 a third. From 1955 to 1971 the exchange rate was fixed at 2.46 to the US dollar. Then there was another round of high inflation in the 1970s and ’80s, which was caused by the global devaluation of money against gold in 1971, global inflationary pressures, China phasing out its price controls, easy credit, and a lack of spending controls among state-owned enterprises. In 2005, the peg to the dollar was ended.

The next chart shows Chinese inflation rates going back to 1750, including the periods of hyperinflation. The era of relatively stable inflation early on was largely the result of China using metals (silver and copper) as money, which were valued by weight. When the Qing Dynasty broke down, provinces declared independence and issued their own silver and copper coins, which were also valued by their weights. This is why there were not exceptionally high levels of inflation, even during this terrible period.

*
The following charts show the value of Chinese currency in dollar and gold terms since 1920, plus the inflation and growth rates over that period. As you can see, there were two major periods of devaluation: the first when the new exchange rate was set up in 1948, and between 1980 and the 1990s when there was a series of devaluations aimed to support exporters and manage current account deficits,15 which caused very high inflation. As shown, growth was relatively fast and erratic until around 1978, then fast and much less erratic until the recent brief plunge due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

While most Chinese have a strong desire to save and an appropriate sense of risk that innately drives them to store their wealth in safe liquid assets (e.g., cash deposits) and tangible assets (e.g., real estate and some gold), some investors have limited experiences with riskier assets such as equities and risky debt and so can be naïve, though they are learning very fast. But when it comes to Chinese policy makers’ understanding of money, credit, monetary policy, fiscal policy, and how to restructure bad debts, I have found them to have the same kinds of deep and timeless perspectives that they have for the rest of their history.

### FROM 1800 UNTIL NOW
**I’ll begin with a brief overview of the period between 1800 and the foundation of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, examine the Mao period a bit more closely, then take a deeper look at the period spanning the rise of Deng Xiaoping (from 1978 to 1997) and the advent of Xi Jinping (in 2012) until now. Then, in the next chapter, we will look at US-China relations.**

#### The Decline from 1800 until 1949
**China’s post-1800 decline began when a) the last Chinese royal dynasty (the Qing Dynasty) became decadent and weak at the same time that b) the British and some other Western countries became strong, which led British and other capitalist/colonialists to increasingly take control of China economically. Meanwhile, c) China’s financial and monetary system broke down under the burden of debts that couldn’t be paid and the printing of money that caused a collapse in its value, while d) there were massive domestic rebellions and civil wars.**16 **That severe Big Cycle decline, in which all the major strengths were in mutually reinforcing free falls, continued from around 1840 until 1949.** The end of World War II in 1945 led to the repatriation of most foreigners in China (except for Hong Kong and Taiwan) and a civil war to determine how the wealth and power would be divided—i.e., a war between the communists and the capitalists—on the Chinese mainland. **This long period of decline was a classic case of the archetypical Big Cycle, and it was followed by an equally classic case of a Big Cycle upswing, in which a new leader wins control, consolidates power, and begins building the basic structures that are passed on to succeeding generations, who build on each other’s accomplishments.**

**As discussed in previous chapters, the early 1800s was the time of Britain’s rise and expansion across the globe—which brought the rising British Empire into greater contact with China.** The British East India Company wanted tea, silk, and porcelain from China because it was extremely lucrative to sell back home. However, the British didn’t have anything that the Chinese wanted to trade for so they had to pay for these goods in silver, which was a global money at the time. When the British began to run out of silver, they smuggled opium into China from India, which they sold for silver, which they then used to pay for Chinese goods. The Chinese fought to stop those sales, which led to the First Opium War, in which **the technologically superior British Navy defeated the Chinese in 1839–42, leading Britain to impose a treaty that gave the British Hong Kong and opened up a number of Chinese ports, most notably Shanghai, to traders from Britain (as well as other powers in subsequent treaties), which eventually led to the loss of large parts of northern China to Russia and Japan and the loss of what we now call Taiwan to Japan**.

The Qing government borrowed heavily from foreigners to fight internal rebellions. Reparations, especially after the Boxer Rebellion (a Chinese rebellion against foreigners in 1901), also created huge liabilities. When the rebellion failed, the victorious foreign powers demanded the equivalent of about 18,000 tons of silver, which was structured around a 40-year debt that was guaranteed by the tariff income on the ports they controlled. The Qing government, starved of financial resources, faced many uprisings over the couple decades following the Opium Wars and spent down their savings to finance fighting them. **The combination of 1) not having strong leadership, 2) not having sound finances, 3) having internal rebellions that undermined productivity and were** **costly in money and lives, 4) fighting foreigners, which was costly financially and in lives, and 5) experiencing some big disruptive acts of nature produced the mutually and self-reinforcing decline known as the Century of Humiliation.**

**It is easy to see the important role that period has played in shaping Chinese leaders’ perspectives—e.g., why Mao saw capitalism as a system in which companies pursued profits through imperialism (i.e., through the control and exploitation of countries, just as the British and other capitalist powers did to China), enriching the greedy elites while exploiting workers.** Mao’s view of capitalism differs from my own because his experience with it was so different, though both of our views of it are true. Capitalism has provided me and most others I know, including immigrants from all over the world, with enormous opportunities. The America I came of age in was the land of opportunity, in which one could learn, contribute, and be rewarded fairly and without boundaries. This experience of seeing through another’s eyes was another reminder for me of how important radical open-mindedness and thoughtful disagreement are to finding out what is true. It led me to study Marxism a bit, so I could understand why it made sense to Mao and others as a philosophy. My inclination up until then was to think of it as at best impractical and at worst a potentially evil threat, yet I was ignorant about what Marx had actually said.

#### Enter Marxism-Leninism
Before I examined it for myself, I’d assumed that Marxism-Leninism was a dysfunctional system in which resources were theoretically distributed “from each according to his abilities, to each according his needs” that failed to produce much because of its lack of incentives to be inventive and efficient. I didn’t appreciate that Marx was a brilliant man who came up with some good theories and some seemingly bad ones that he would probably agree were not adequately tested and refined by the evolutionary system he espoused. Now I wonder how Marx, a very practical man who believed that philosophies should only be judged by the successes and failures they produce, would have diagnosed communism’s near total and universal failure and changed his thinking as a result.

**Marx’s most important theory/system is called “dialectical materialism.”** “Dialectical” refers to how opposites interact to produce change, and “materialism” means that everything has a material (i.e., physical) existence that interacts with other things in a mechanical way. **In a nutshell, dialectical materialism is a system for producing change by observing and influencing the “contradictions” of “opposites” that produce “struggles” that, when resolved, produce progress. Marx meant it to apply to everything. The conflict and struggle between the classes that is manifest in the conflict between capitalism and communism is just one of many such examples.**

Much of that sounds right to me.

Though I’m no expert on Marxism, the process of dialectical materialism is similar to the process that I discovered for myself and explained in my book Principles: Life and Work*, in which I struggle with conflicts, reflect on them, write down the principles I derive from them, and then improve them—and do that over and over again, in a never-ending, evolutionary way that I describe as “looping.” In other words, I believe, and it sounds like Marx believed, that learning and evolving from conflicts and mistakes is the best approach.

It is also my opinion that capitalism—an incentive system that rewards the people who are most inventive and productive, and that has capital markets that reward good capital allocation decisions and penalizes bad ones—will lead to a) more productivity over the long run (and hence a bigger total pie), b) big wealth differences, and c) capital markets (especially debt markets) that become overextended and then break down. When there is a capital market/economic breakdown at the same time that there are big wealth and values disparities, that is likely to lead to some form of revolution. Such revolutions can end harmoniously and productively, but most are preceded by great conflict and destruction. So, thus far the way Marx appeared to see things and the way I see things aren’t radically different, though what we would choose and what we would think should be done are probably radically different. If you asked me a) whether I’d rather have what capitalism has delivered or what communism delivered and b) if I think the capitalist path we have now is more logical than the communist path we have seen, I’d choose capitalism as my answer to both. On the other hand, if you asked me a) if both the capitalist and the communist systems need to be reformed to make the pie grow more effectively and to be distributed more fairly and b) if Marx’s dialectical materialism approach to evolving and my 5-Step Process to evolving are broadly similar and the best ways of evolving well, I would say yes to both questions (without getting hung up on how, exactly, our two approaches are different). Also, as far as the wealth gap goes, I share the view that it has been a big issue throughout history that can threaten all systems. I too believe that conflicts produce struggle and that working through struggle produces progress. I consider the conflicts between the classes (i.e., the “haves” and the “have-nots”) to be among the main drivers of the rise and decline of empires, and hence the progress of history, with those drivers being the three big cycles—money and credit, internal order/disorder, and external order/disorder—discussed earlier in this book.

**All of those cycles across the leading countries were in their decline/conflict phases between 1930 and 1945, which led to revolutions and wars in China and all over the world. But as always happens, the forces of decline ran their course and new domestic and world orders began. More specifically, the external war ended in 1945 and foreign forces left most of mainland China. China’s communists and capitalists then fought an internal war that ended in 1949, which led to a new domestic order, which was communism under Mao. Put yourself in Mao’s position during the 1900–49 period. Imagine him reading what Marx wrote, and think about his actions during that period and in the post-1949 period. It makes sense that Mao was a Marxist and held the established Confucian approach to harmony in disdain. Democracy as we know it doesn’t have any roots in China. Legalism, with its autocratic approach, does. Capitalism, on the other hand, is** **growing and becoming much more deeply rooted today.**

Lenin built on what Marx said to create a two-step process for building the state, in which there is at first a vanguard of workers though “democratic centralism” (in which only members of the party vote), which eventually leads to a higher communist state in which there is common ownership of the means of production, social and economic equality, and general prosperity. **Mao liked the Marxist-Leninist approach, in which the achievement of the communist ideal came at the end of a very long evolutionary process. Deng Xiaoping reiterated this view in an interview with “60 Minutes” in 1986, in which he said that the capitalism he was adopting and communism were not incompatible. “According to Marxism,” he said, “communist society is based on material abundance… Only when there is material abundance can the principle of a communist society—‘from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs’—be applied. Socialism is the first stage of communism…” Maybe that’s true and maybe it’s not. Time will tell.** To me, thus far capitalism—in China or anywhere else—is winning the competition. However, there can be no question that the Chinese mix of communism and capitalism has produced remarkable economic results over the last 40 years.

In the next section I will very briefly summarize what happened between 1949 and now. Then I will delve into each of its phases in greater detail.

#### The Rise from 1949 until Now
**Though it’s a bit of an oversimplification, we can think of China’s evolution from 1949 until now as occurring in three phases:**

**1. The Mao phase, from 1949 to 1976.**
**2. The Deng and Deng’s successors phase, from 1978 to 2012 when Xi Jinping came to power.**
**3. The Xi Jinping phase from 2012 until now.**

**Each phase moved China along the arc of its long-term development, building on its earlier accomplishments. In brief, events transpired as follows:**

**From 1949 until he died in 1976, Mao (with his various ministers, most importantly Zhou Enlai) consolidated power; built China’s foundation of institutions, governance, and infrastructure; and ruled China as a communist emperor.** Isolated from the rest of the world, China followed a strict communist system in which the government owned everything and maintained tight bureaucratic controls. Immediately following the deaths of Mao and Zhou Enlai, there was a power struggle in 1976–78 between the Gang of Four hardliners and the reformists. Deng Xiaoping and the reformists emerged victorious in 1978, leading to the second phase.
**Deng and his ministers ran China directly or indirectly until his death in 1997.** During this phase China moved to a more collective leadership model, opened up to the outside world, introduced and developed market/capitalist practices, and became much stronger financially and more powerful in other ways that didn’t appear threatening to the United States or to other countries. To finance what was then viewed as a symbiotic relationship in which the US bought items that were attractively priced from China, China lent Americans money. As a result, the US acquired US dollar-denominated debt liabilities and the Chinese acquired dollar-denominated assets. After Deng’s death his successors Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao (and those who led China with them) continued in the same direction so China’s wealth and power grew in fundamentally sound ways that did not appear threatening to the US. In 2008, the global financial crisis came along, which led to greater tensions over wealth in the United States and other developed countries, increased resentment at the flight of manufacturing jobs to China, and increased debt-financed growth in all countries, including China.
**Xi Jinping came to power in 2012, presiding over a richer, more powerful China that was becoming overly indebted, too corrupt, and increasingly at odds with the United States.** He accelerated economic reforms, took on the challenge of trying to contain debt growth while aggressively reforming the economy, supported the building of leading technologies, and took an increasingly global stance. He also became more proactive in reducing China’s gaps in education and its income inequality, in protecting the environment, and in consolidating political control. As China’s powers grew and Xi’s bold objectives (e.g., the Belt and Road Initiative and the Made in China 2025 plan) became more apparent, tensions with the US rose, especially after Donald Trump was elected president (a populist/nationalist who campaigned on stanching the US’s loss of manufacturing jobs to China). China’s position vis-à-vis the US became one of a rapidly strengthening power challenging the dominant one.

Now let’s take a closer look.

#### Phase One: Building the Foundation (1949–1976)
Mao and the communists won the civil war and started the People’s Republic of China in 1949 and quickly consolidated power. Mao became the de facto emperor (titled “chairman of the People’s Republic of China”) and Zhou Enlai his prime minister (titled “premier”). Domestically, the new government quickly repaired transportation and communications infrastructure and nationalized the banking system under the aegis of the new central bank, the People’s Bank of China. To bring down inflation it tightened credit and stabilized the value of the currency. The government also nationalized most businesses and redistributed agricultural land from large landowners to the peasants who farmed the land. Whether one worked or not, one received basic pay. There was no merit-based pay. The protections that these guaranteed basic incomes and benefits provided everyone were collectively called “the iron rice bowl.” These changes created a stable economy but little motivation.

Internationally, China was isolationist, though it wasn’t long before the new government found itself in a war. As explained in the last chapter, in 1945 the new world order divided the world into two main ideological camps—the democratic capitalists led by the United States and the autocratic communists led by the Soviet Union—with a third group of countries that were not committed to either side. Many of these nonaligned countries had until recently been colonies, most notably under the declining British Empire. China was clearly in the Soviet-led camp. On February 14, 1950, Mao and Stalin signed the Treaty of Friendship, Alliance, and Mutual Assistance to cooperate and come to each other’s aid militarily.

At the end of World War II, Korea was divided at the 38th parallel, with the Russians controlling the north and the Americans the south. In June 1950, North Korea invaded South Korea. The Chinese stayed out of the fighting initially, as they were preoccupied with their own challenges and didn’t want to be drawn into a war. In conjunction with the United Nations, the United States responded by bringing its forces into the fighting, taking the war into North Korea, which borders China. The Chinese viewed this as a threat, especially since US General Douglas MacArthur made it clear that he would attack China. Though the Soviets and the Chinese had a pact to support each other, Stalin didn’t want to go war with the United States so he didn’t provide China with the military support it expected. Though the Chinese were ill-prepared for war against the much greater (and nuclear-armed) American power, the Chinese entered the war, pushing the American and UN troops back to the previously established border. This was Mao’s first great challenge, and it is considered a great victory by the Chinese.

**Between the PRC’s founding in 1949 and Mao’s death in 1976, the Chinese economy grew rather quickly, at an average annual rate of about 6 percent, with an average annual inflation rate of** **around 1–2 percent, accumulating around $4 billion dollars in foreign exchange reserves. This represented a modest improvement, but China remained poor. And there was a lot of volatility along the way.** Specifically:

Between 1952 and 1957, with the help of the Soviets, industrial production grew at 19 percent a year, national income grew at 9 percent a year, and agricultural production grew by 4 percent a year. The Chinese government built industrial facilities and imported lots of equipment from the Soviets. It also reformed its agricultural practices and methods by creating cooperatives to achieve economies of scale by having farmers work together. These were highly productive years. However, after Stalin’s death in 1953, Nikita Khrushchev came to power, criticized Stalin and his policies, and alienated Mao, which led to these Chinese and Soviet leaders openly criticizing each other, which began a period of reduced Soviet support.
Around 1960 the Soviet Union shifted from being an ally to being an enemy and withdrew economic support.
From 1958 through 1962, due to a drought, economic mismanagement from the top-down mandated attempt to become an industrial power called the Great Leap Forward, and reduced Soviet economic support, the economy contracted by 25 percent and an estimated 16–40 million people died of famine. Estimates suggest that over that period industrial output fell by 19 percent in aggregate, with a fall of around 36 percent from the 1959 peak. Historians agree that it was a terrible period, though there is some disagreement about how much it was terrible because of terrible management by Mao versus other causes.
Between 1963 and 1966, the economy recovered and went to new highs. But then came the Cultural Revolution.

As is classic in all cycles, challenges to Mao’s leadership and ideology arose. Since most Chinese emperors were taken down by insiders, this risk had to be on Mao’s mind (and everyone else’s). So from 1966 until 1976, he fostered a political revolution, called the Cultural Revolution, to “purify class ranks” and reinforce “Mao Zedong Thought.” Mao won the political/ideological battle, purging his rival Lin Biao, who died in a plane crash during a botched coup he was accused of organizing, and “Mao Zedong Thought” was written into the constitution. The cost of Mao’s triumph was appalling. The Cultural Revolution curtailed education and damaged or cost countless lives (estimates range from hundreds of thousands to as many as 20 million dead) and dealt a huge blow to the Chinese economy. By the early 1970s the situation had begun to stabilize under the operational leadership of Premier Zhou Enlai. In 1969, there were clashes between Chinese and Russian troops along the border.

1971 was a year of great change in China. The Cultural Revolution was producing turmoil and Mao’s health was declining. That contributed to Zhou Enlai playing an increasing leadership role from the background, which led to him being elected “vice chairman of the Communist Party” in 1973, putting him in the position of appearing to be Mao’s successor. Also in 1971 China was threatened by the Soviet Union, which was militarily much more powerful and shared a 2,500-mile border with China, leading to increasing border threats. In 1975, after the US withdrew from Vietnam, which shares a 900-mile border with southern China, Russia built an alliance with Vietnam and moved in troops and arms. Mao had a geopolitical principle to identify the main enemy, neutralize the enemy’s allies, and draw them away from the enemy. Mao identified the Soviet Union as China’s main enemy and recognized that the Soviets were in a war with the United States that hadn’t yet turned hot but could. That led him to make the strategic move of approaching the US. Henry Kissinger quoted Chinese officials as saying, “The last thing the US imperialists are willing to see is a victory by Soviet revisionists in a Sino-Soviet war, as this would [allow the Soviets] to build up a big empire more powerful than the American empire in resources and manpower.”

I also know that Zhou Enlai, a reformist, had wanted to build a strategic relationship with the United States for decades because a close Chinese friend of mine, Ji Chaozhu, who was Zhou Enlai’s interpreter for 17 years and interpreted in the first Kissinger-Zhou Enlai talks, told me that that was the case.17 China wanted to open a relationship with the United States to neutralize the Russian threat and to enhance its geopolitical and economic position. **Because in 1971 it was especially clear that it was in the interests of China and the United States to build a relationship, they both made overtures to establish relations.** In July 1971 Kissinger—and then in February 1972 President Richard Nixon—went to China and in October 1971 the United Nations recognized the Mao-led communist Chinese government and gave China a seat on the Security Council. **During Nixon’s visit, Nixon and Zhou Enlai signed an agreement—the Shanghai Communique—in which the US stated that it “acknowledges that all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Strait maintain that there is but one China and that Taiwan is part of China.** The United States government does not challenge that position. It reaffirms its interest in a peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question by the Chinese themselves.” **Despite those assurances, reunification with Taiwan still remains the most consistently contentious issue between China and the US.**

Following those moves of rapprochement, US relations with China and trade and other exchanges began.

**Then, in January and September 1976, first Zhou Enlai and then Mao died and communist China faced its first succession crisis.** From 1976 to 1978, there was a fight for power between the Gang of Four (hardline conservatives who fostered the Cultural Revolution) and the reformists (who wanted economic modernization and an opening up to the outside world). The reformists won, and Deng Xiaoping became the paramount leader in 1978.

#### Phase Two: Deng and His Successors Gain Strengths Through Economic Reforms and Opening Up Without Creating Threats to Other Countries (1978–2012)
**Deng Xiaoping was 74, with a wealth of experience under his belt. From 1978 until he died in 1997 his most important policies were conveyed in a single phrase: reform and opening up. “Reform” meant market reforms, using markets to help allocate resources and incentivize people, and “opening up” meant interacting with the outside world to learn, improve, and trade. Capitalism became a part of the communist mix.** China was still extremely poor—its per capita income was less than $200 a year. Deng knew these moves would make China financially stronger if they were not disrupted by the far stronger foreign powers who wanted China to remain weak; the key was to pursue them in ways that benefited and didn’t threaten them. **In 1979, he established full diplomatic relations with the US.**

**Early on, Deng set out a 70-year plan to a) double incomes and ensure that the population would have enough food and clothing by the end of the 1980s, b) quadruple GDP per capita by the end of the 20th century (which was achieved in 1995, five years ahead of schedule), and c) increase per capita GDP to the levels of medium-level developed countries by 2050 (on the 100th anniversary of the PRC). He made it clear that China would achieve those goals by having a “socialist market economy,” which he also referred to as “socialism with Chinese characteristics.”** He made that radical shift without criticizing Marxism-Leninism; indeed, as noted earlier, he did not see the two systems as fundamentally at odds, but rather viewed them through the lens of dialectical materialism, as opposites that could be resolved, leading to progress along the long arc toward communism’s ideal state.

**During his term, Deng also reformed the decision-making** **structure of government.** More specifically, he moved its decision-making process from one that was dominated by a single leader (previously Mao) to one in which the Politburo Standing Committee took votes when a consensus couldn’t be reached. He also changed the system of choosing the standing members of the Politburo from one in which the supreme leader personally selected them to one in which candidates—generally qualified government officials—were chosen via consultation and negotiation with experienced party elders. To institutionalize his governing philosophy, Deng shaped the new Chinese constitution, which was adopted in 1982. This new constitution also made a number of changes to facilitate the economic reforms and open-door policies that Deng wanted. It established term limits for leaders (two five-year terms) and discouraged autocratic decision making by formalizing his “collective leadership/democratic centralist” policies. The new constitution also provided for greater freedom of religion, opinion, speech, and the press, to encourage the Chinese to “seek truth from facts.” **These reforms enabled the first orderly transition of power to the next-generation Politburo Standing Committee, led by Jiang Zemin, and then on to Hu Jintao, with their transitions following the prescribed two five-year terms. Each successive leadership team kept to Deng’s basic path of making China richer and more powerful by making its economy more market-driven/capitalist and by increasing China’s trade with and learning from other countries, with those in other countries feeling more excited than threatened by their interactions and trade with China.**

**Regaining territories it lost during its Century of Humiliation was also a very important long-term goal.** In 1984, after a lot of haggling with the UK, it was agreed that Hong Kong would return to Chinese sovereignty in 1997, with a “one country, two systems” approach. Then in 1986, China reached an agreement with Portugal to obtain Macau’s return to Chinese sovereignty in 1999.

In 1984, I had my first direct contact with China. I visited China at the invitation of the China International Trust Investment Corporation (CITIC), China’s only “window company” (which meant that it was allowed to deal freely with the outside world), whose leaders had asked me to help them understand how world financial markets work. The company had been set up as an extension of Deng’s reform and opening-up policies and was run by Rong Yiren, an old Chinese capitalist who had chosen to stay in China even after his family’s business was nationalized.

China was very poor and backward then. However, it was immediately clear to me that its people were smart and civilized and its poverty was widely shared. In this regard, it wasn’t like most other undeveloped countries I’d been to, where the poor seemed to live in a different century. China’s backwardness stemmed from a general lack of access to what was available in the outside world and from its demotivating system. For example, I gave out $10 calculators as gifts, and even the highest-ranking people thought they were miraculous devices. At the time, all businesses (including small restaurants) were government-owned and bureaucratic. The Chinese couldn’t choose their jobs, never mind their careers, and received no financial incentives for working well. There was no private ownership of property, such as one’s home, and there was no contact with what the world had to offer in terms of best practices and products.

Because it was clear to me that the closed door was the reason for China’s poverty, I believed that its removal would naturally equalize its standards of living with the developed world, just as unconstrained water naturally seeks the same level. It was easy to visualize that happening. I remember being on the 10th floor of CITIC’s “Chocolate Building” to give a lecture. I pointed out the window at the two-story *hutongs* (poor neighborhoods) below us and told my audience that it would not be long before they would be gone and skyscrapers would stand in their place. “You don’t know China,” they said in disbelief. I told them that they did not know the power of the economic arbitrages that would occur as a result of opening up.

While the opening up created a great natural opportunity, the Chinese made the most of it and performed even beyond my highest expectations. They did that by making and implementing Deng’s reforms, supported by uniquely Chinese cultural influences. The expressed goal that I heard a lot of in those early days of reform was to “break the iron rice bowl,” which was to no longer provide demotivating guaranteed employment and ensured basic benefits and replace them with more incentive-based compensation. Globalization also helped a lot; the world wanted to include China.

Deng was an eager learner and he directed his policy makers to learn from outsiders in the same way that he did. He especially relied on Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore and other leaders of the culturally aligned “Asian Tiger” economies for advice. I remember a dinner with the head of China’s MOFTEC (which was their ministry of commerce), in which he rattled off details about the operations of Singapore’s airport (including how long a passenger had to wait to get their bags at the baggage claim), how Singapore achieved such great results, and how China was going to implement those practices itself. Many years later I had the opportunity to host Lee Kuan Yew at my house, along with some other esteemed guests. We asked him to share his thoughts about leaders of the present and past. We were eager to get his perspective because he had known most of them over the last 50 years and was one of the greats himself. Without hesitating, he said that Deng was the greatest leader of the 20th century. Why? Because he was smart and wise and open-minded, he was extremely practical, and he delivered great results for his country of a billion people.

While Deng formally stepped down from the Politburo’s Standing Committee in 1987, he remained the de facto leader of China, which continued to open up and become more capitalist at a breakneck pace. I played a small part in its evolution over the years. In 1989, my CITIC friend Wang Li (who was responsible for bond trading) introduced me to the group of people who, along with her, had been designated to create the organization that would set up the first stock markets in the new China (the Stock Exchange Executive Council, known as SEEC). They had been appointed by seven companies at the request of the visionary economic reformer and historian Wang Qishan.

China was still very poor, and SEEC’s office was in a dingy hotel because the group lacked adequate funding. Still, they had what mattered most—a clear mission to create big changes, smart people of good character, open-mindedness to allow rapid learning, and determination to achieve their goals. This was not a job to them; it was a noble mission to improve their country. I was thrilled to help them. And over the decades that followed, I saw how they and many others built the Chinese financial markets to become among the largest in the world.

Then, a shock happened that led everyone to question just about everything. In 1989, a movement to democratize China grew into the demonstrations that led to the crackdown known as the Tiananmen Square incident. The leadership was split on how to handle the movement. Deng made the defining choice, which was to sideline the liberal forces and go ahead with the conservatives’ crackdown. Most Chinese people I spoke with at the time were worried that China would slip back into its old Mao/Gang-of-Four-type ways. A very close friend from CITIC, Madame Gu, whose brother was China’s minister of defense, happened to be staying with my family at the time, so I saw events unfold through her eyes as well as through the eyes of other Chinese friends. Madame Gu had been an idealistic follower of Mao in the early years after “liberation.” When the Cultural Revolution came along she lost her husband to persecution and was shunned by friends. She got past that terrible experience to work on behalf of the country she loved and rose to a senior job at CITIC. She cried at the prospect of a return to those terrible old days. Tiananmen Square significantly set back most countries’ relationships with China, but it didn’t keep Deng and his government from continuing their reforms. Over time, most of my Chinese friends who were heartbroken about the crackdown came to believe that the government had made the right move because their greatest fear was revolutionary disorder.

Over the next decade, the economy continued its strong growth, and relations and trade with the West became better than ever. Globalization, which helped China immensely, can be said to have begun in 1995 with the formation of the World Trade Organization (the epoch effectively ended with the election of Donald Trump in 2016). China joined the WTO in 2001 and its position in world trade soared. That year, the United States had more trade than China with 80 percent of WTO member countries. Now China is a larger trading partner than the United States for about 70 percent of those countries.

**During this period of globalization, a symbiotic relationship developed between China and the US in which the Chinese manufactured consumer goods in an extremely cost-effective way and loaned the US money to buy them. It was a hell of a “buy now, pay later” deal for the Americans, and the Chinese liked it because they built their savings in the world’s reserve currency.** It struck me as odd that the Chinese, who were earning about a 40th of Americans on average, would be lending money to Americans, since rich people are in a better position to lend than poor ones. To me, it was a shocking reflection of how deeply Americans were willing to get into debt to finance their overconsumption and how much more the Chinese valued saving. It was also a reflection of how emerging countries that want to save in the bonds/debt of the leading reserve currency countries can lead those countries to become overindebted.

In 1992, China’s “triangular” debt crisis came to a head. These were debt and economic problems that arose from China’s five major government-owned banks lending to large, inefficient, and unprofitable state-owned enterprises with the implicit guarantee of the central government. Zhu Rongji, a bold reformer at the top of the party, led the efforts to restructure the economy to become more efficient. This process was extremely controversial and hurt a lot of people who had benefited from the old system, so it took a lot of courage and intelligence, as well as support from the top, to execute. Best practices (e.g., using “bad banks” to take, sell off, and wind down the bad debts) were used and modified for the Chinese environment. Zhu became premier in 1998 and in that capacity continued to aggressively pursue reforms to modernize and make the Chinese economy more efficient, until he retired in 2003. Many of his former aides are among China’s senior economic policy makers today.

**In 1995, I sent my 11-year-old son Matt to China, where he lived with Madame Gu and her husband and attended what was then a poor local school (*Shi Jia Hu Tong Xiao Xue*).** Matt had been to China with me many times since he was 3 years old and had gotten to know Madame Gu well. He didn’t speak the language, so he would have to learn through immersion, which he did. Though his school was poor (for example, there wasn’t heat until late November, so students wore their coats in class), it had smart and caring teachers who provided the children with an excellent, complete education that included character development. Though Matt was deprived of some comforts he was used to (he couldn’t take hot showers because the old apartment building he lived in only had hot water two days a week, for example), he was superbly educated, loved, and better developed than he would have been in our rich community. He built deep attachments with his teachers and friends that still exist. The experience led him to set up a foundation to help Chinese orphans that he ran for 12 years. Around that time I also **hired a Chinese team to invest American institutional money in Chinese businesses. I pursued the effort for a couple of years but had to discontinue it because I found it too difficult to run it and Bridgewater at the same time.**

In 1995–96 it became widely known that Deng’s health was failing. Chinese leaders worried that his death would be viewed as an opportunity to challenge Chinese authority. They were especially worried that the Taiwanese would hold a referendum in favor of independence. President Lee Teng-hui, whom China regarded as a pro-independence leader, had just made a controversial visit to the US, shortly in advance of his nomination for Taiwan’s 1996 presidential election. Madame Gu knew the Chinese official in charge of relations with Taiwan and arranged for me to meet with him. He told me that China would do anything, including going to war, to prevent Taiwanese independence. Should a new Chinese leader permit a referendum, he explained, the Chinese people would regard him as too weak to lead. China had seen how Russia’s brutal suppression of rebels in the Chechen Republic had led to reduced support for independence; the Chinese hoped that a series of missile tests in the Taiwan Strait would similarly dampen Taiwan’s enthusiasm. In March 1996, President Bill Clinton, who was facing re-election, sent two aircraft carriers into the Taiwan Strait. Further military movements and threats on both sides followed. At the end of the day, the Taiwanese never held the referendum, so my Chinese friends thought their moves had been successful, while the Americans believed that they had humiliated the Chinese (which I only recently found out from an American friend who was involved in the decision to send in the American warships). As a result of the “Third Taiwan Strait Crisis,” the Chinese significantly built up their military capabilities in the region. I point this out to convey a) how important Taiwan’s reunification with China is and b) how risky the situation was 25 years ago, when China was not nearly as strong militarily as it is now. In short, **I would worry a lot if we were to see a “Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis.”**

**Deng died on February 19, 1997, having transformed China almost beyond recognition. When he came to power, 90 percent of the population lived in extreme poverty; at the time of his death that number had fallen by more than half, and as of the most recent data is below 1 percent. From the start of his reforms in 1978 until his death in 1997, the Chinese economy grew at an average rate of 10 percent a year, sextupling in size while experiencing an average inflation rate of just 8 percent.** Its reserves grew from $4 billion to nearly $150 billion (inflation-adjusted to today’s dollars, its reserves grew by over $250 billion). Those reserves covered 60 percent of annual imports in 1978. By 1998, they covered more than 125 percent of imports (and nearly 800 percent of foreign debt service).

**Deng’s successors Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao and their teams continued the reforms and the advances through many ups and downs (though more ups than downs).** In 1997, the Asian financial crisis came along. With Zhu Rongji assigned to run the effort, China did a very successful debt and corporate restructuring, which included sales of unprofitable state-owned enterprises, the building up of exports and foreign exchange reserves, a crackdown on corruption, and the further development and improvement of markets and market functioning. These and other changes were all important evolutionary steps. I felt lucky to be intimately involved at the grassroots level with some of them—e.g., the debt restructuring and asset sales. Though these events seemed bigger at the time than they appear in retrospect, they were all significant achievements. I also ran into cases of corruption and bad behavior, and witnessed close-up the ongoing struggle between the good and the bad that led to further reforms.

**As is typical of post-war periods of peace and prosperity, when the leading power isn’t threatened and emerging countries aren’t yet threatening, emerging countries can learn a lot from the leading powers as they work together in a symbiotic way, until the emerging power becomes powerful enough to threaten the leading power. In addition to benefiting from the learning, they benefit from trading with each other (until that becomes disadvantageous), and they benefit from using the capital markets to their mutual benefit (until that becomes disadvantageous).**

**More specifically, the 1978–2008 period of fast growth in China came about because 1) the world was still in the peace and prosperity phase of the Big Cycle in which globalization and capitalism—i.e., the belief that goods and services should be produced wherever is most cost-effective, there should be free flows of talented people without prejudice toward their nationalities, nationalism is bad, and global equal opportunity and profit-seeking capitalism are good—were understood to be the widely accepted paths to a better world, while at the same time 2) Deng Xiaoping swung the pendulum from communist and isolationist policies that worked terribly to market/state-capitalist and open-door policies that worked terrifically. That led China to learn a lot, attract a lot of foreign capital, and become a giant exporter and big saver.**

As the Chinese became more capable of producing cost-effectively, they provided the world with inexpensive goods at first and more advanced goods later, becoming much richer in the process. Other emerging countries did so as well, the world expanded, and the wealth gaps between the richest countries and the poorest countries narrowed as the poorest countries rose the most while the richest countries grew at slower rates. These circumstances lifted most boats, especially the boats of the global elites. China rose to be a nearly comparable power to the United States, and together they created most of the world’s new wealth and new technologies. Europe, which had been the source of the greatest global powers from the 15th to the 20th centuries, became relatively weak, and Japan and Russia became secondary powers. All other countries were peripheral. While emerging countries like India improved their conditions, none of them achieved world power status.

#### Phase Three: The Emergence of US-China Conflicts and the End of Globalization (2008–Present)
**As is classic, periods of prosperity financed by debt growth lead to debt bubbles and large wealth gaps.** In the US, the bubble burst in 2008 (as it did in 1929), and the world economy contracted and middle-class Americans and those in other countries were hurt (as in 1929–32). Interest rates were pushed down to 0 percent (as in 1931), which still wasn’t enough easing, so central banks printed a lot of money and bought a lot of financial assets after 2008 (like in 1934), which drove up their prices in most countries starting in 2009 (as happened in 1933–36). This benefited the “haves” (people who had financial assets) more than the “have-nots” (those without them) so the wealth gaps grew wider still (as they did in the 1933–38 period). The “have-nots,” especially those whose jobs were being taken by the Chinese and immigrants, began to rise up against the elites who were benefiting from globalization. As is typically the case when economic bad times coincide with large wealth gaps, populism and nationalism grew around the world (as they also did in the 1930s). That is when the threat the rising powers pose becomes more apparent to the leading powers. **The era of peace, prosperity, and globalization began to wane, giving way to an era of conflicts between the rich and the poor within countries and between the rising country (China) and the dominant world power (the US).**

The Chinese were holding a lot of US dollar-denominated debt—especially from US government agency lenders Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. For quite a while, the US government didn’t let the Chinese holders of this debt know whether it would stand behind it. I had conversations with top Chinese holders of this debt, as did David McCormick (who is now CEO of Bridgewater and was the US Treasury’s undersecretary for international affairs at the time) and Hank Paulson (who was the US Treasury secretary). We were all impressed with the consideration and cooperation with which the Chinese approached the dilemma that the US had caused them. They were calm, empathetic, and cooperative.

In November 2008, leaders of the G20 countries gathered in Washington, DC, and agreed to jointly stimulate their economies through aggressive fiscal and monetary policies. These required a substantial increase of government debt, which was financed by having central banks create more money and credit. **Debt growth in China was significantly faster than economic growth between 2009 and 2012 as a result of those policies.**

#### Becoming a World Power
**In 2012, Xi Jinping came to power and a new administration was chosen.** Following the well-established sequence, first Politburo members were chosen, then ministers, vice ministers, and their senior subordinates. Then the first rounds of plans were made. As when most new leaders take power, there was a lot of excitement and an eagerness to strengthen both the rule of law by purging corruption and China’s economy by strengthening and adding to its market-based reforms. There were a number of brainstorming sessions, and I was lucky enough to participate in a few. They were wonderful collaborations of people with different perspectives who wanted to help; the frankness, open-mindedness, friendliness, and intelligence that they brought to the table was remarkable.

Since then, I have closely followed China’s financial and economic circumstances and have had numerous conversations with its top economic policy makers about such matters as excessive debt growth, the development and management of their shadow banking system, the vulnerabilities in their financial systems, their trade disputes with the US, and more. I always tried to see things from their perspective and think about what I would do if I were in their shoes. I shared what I saw with them as frankly as a doctor discussing a medical case with colleagues, in much the same way as I am sharing it with you in this book.18 As you probably know by now, I believe that everything works like a machine, with timeless and universal cause/effect relationships. Chinese leaders do too, so we almost always came to similar conclusions.

**Over the years, the Xi administration has aggressively pursued policies to reform and open up its markets and its economy; manage its debt growth; more flexibly manage its currency; support entrepreneurship and market-oriented decision making, especially in industries that China wants to be world leaders in; establish sensible regulations run by well-developed regulatory organizations; build its capabilities in the technologies and industries of the future; broaden the economic benefits extended to the people and regions that were lagging the most; and control pollution and environmental degradation.** Yet many people don’t see it that way, which I suspect is because a) the reforms are coming at the same time as other controls are tightening up, b) some of the supports (like credit availability) for small- and medium-size organizations are not as good as they are for larger state-owned enterprises (which has more to do with technical challenges than any reduced desire to foster the development of small- and medium-size organizations), c) the government directs the economy from the top down, sometimes expecting banks and companies to make uneconomic loans (because it wants to do what is best for the country as a whole), d) China coordinates with its businesses in pursuit of national goals, e) it doesn’t let some foreign companies operate on the same terms as Chinese companies, and f) it coordinates fiscal and monetary policy to regulate the economy much more than is done in the major reserve currency countries—all of which are typically unpopular with capitalist outsiders.

Certainly many Americans are critical of these policies. While I won’t delve into the merits of them, I will say that **we should expect all countries’ leaders to try to get the best balance between “state” (government influence and control of the economy) and “capitalism” (free-market control of the economy and capital markets) through the proper management and coordination of monetary and fiscal policies, and we should try to understand the thinking behind their approaches.** For example, President Xi has said he wants to a) reduce the government’s role in pricing and allocating resources, develop the capital markets, and stimulate entrepreneurship while also b) strongly directing the macro economy and regulating markets and other aspects of life to be what he and the party believe are best for most Chinese. In other words, he wants a mix of capitalism and Marxist communism. This is understandably confusing to those who aren’t used to seeing capitalism and communism go together, aren’t watching closely, and haven’t spoken with the policy makers to understand their circumstances and perspectives, **so they can’t see the consistencies that exist amid the seemingly great inconsistencies (i.e., “the dialectics” as Marx and the Chinese leaders would call them)**.

**To understand their circumstances and perspectives, I suggest that you not view what they are doing through stereotypes (e.g., of “what communists do”) and accept that they are trying, and will continue to try, to juggle these two seemingly inconsistent things. In their view capitalism is a way of raising the living standards of most people and is not meant to serve capitalists. Whether one thinks this approach is good or bad, their results have been extremely impressive so we should not expect the Chinese to abandon it for an American or Western approach. Rather, we should study it to see what we can learn from it, the same way that the Chinese have studied and learned from the West. After all, what we have is a competition of approaches that we need to understand in order to play this competitive game well.**

**As far as foreign policy is concerned, China has become stronger and more forceful while the United States has become more confrontational. More specifically, from 2012 until the time of my writing China’s strengths have grown, which has become increasingly apparent and more openly shown (e.g., the Made in China 2025 plan trumpets its plans to dominate certain industries that the United States currently controls). This has sparked a strong reaction in the US, which became most evident after the election of Donald Trump in 2016.**

Trump tapped into the resentments of those left behind by globalization, who believed that China was unfairly competing and stealing their jobs, and nurtured a new spirit of protectionism and nationalism. **It wasn’t just Trump. China’s strength had become a provocation for more moderate policy makers as well. Where there had been synergy there was now raw competition.**

**Basically China does not want to be contained and the United States (and some other countries) want to contain it. What does that mean geopolitically? As you know by now, countries’ boundaries have constantly changed over time, they are often in dispute, and international law isn’t worth a hill of beans relative to power in resolving these disputes. In 2009 China declared to the United Nations that it has “indisputable sovereignty over” an area in the East and South China Seas. The area is marked by a “nine-dash line” on a World War II era map presented by China; it covers offshore waters east of Vietnam, north of Malaysia, and west of the Philippines, which include a bunch of islands, are important for shipping that China needs, and are believed to have undiscovered oil reserves, which I imagine China would love to have given its huge imported oil needs and the risk of oil imports from the Middle East being cut off. If you read the World War II case study in Chapter 6 and saw how the US cut off resources to Japan, you know the issue: China has a great need for oil and other imports that currently come through a choke point at the Strait of Malacca.**

**As a result of all of this and other assertions, the perception of** **China as a threat/enemy has emerged, globalization has reversed, and “wars” have intensified, starting with the trade and economic wars, expanding to the technology and the geopolitical wars and, most recently, to the capital war. All remain relatively mild in relation to what they could be, but they should be watched closely. Eventually the actual powers of a country that are recognized become consistent with the actual powers that exist. The actual powers that exist are reflected in the gauges and other facts that I’m watching for guidance.**

China has continued to grow internally and to expand its investment and business activities outside its borders. **It has invested heavily in the developing world, most notably through the Belt and Road Initiative, which extends through Central Asia, starting with the countries on its border (Kazakhstan, Pakistan, Tajikistan, and Afghanistan) to Europe, and through the Arabian Peninsula and South Asia into the Mediterranean and Africa. The amounts invested and earmarked for investment are enormous—the largest such program since the Marshall Plan. It is a good demonstration that wealth = power.** While these moves have been appreciated by the countries that received the benefits from roads and other infrastructure, resources, and trade, they have also sparked resentments from recipient countries who are having problems paying back their loans and find that China is too controlling, and from the United States because China’s assertions of soft power have lessened American influence in those countries.

**As far as China’s internal politics are concerned, in 2018 Xi a) consolidated power around himself and his supporters (called “the core” leadership), b) amended the Chinese constitution to make it clear that the Chinese Communist Party has control over everything, c) eliminated term limits for the president and vice president, d) created supervisory commissions to ensure that government officials are operating consistently with the party’s wishes, and e) enshrined Xi’s perspective, called “Xi Jinping Thought,” into the constitution. As of this writing, big political changes, increased** **controls, and wider distribution of wealth are all underway.** Some people are concerned that Xi is becoming more autocratic than Mao. I’m no expert on Chinese politics so I don’t have much to offer when it comes to China’s internal political matters, but I will pass along what I am told, which is that Xi’s controversial moves to tighten his control came about because of the belief that China is entering a more difficult phase in a more challenging world, and that at such times, unity and continuity of leadership are especially important, and that will be the case even more over the next few years. As mentioned earlier, * during* *periods of great crisis, more autocratic and less democratic leadership tends to be preferred.*

Then, in late 2019, the COVID-19 pandemic began in China, sparking a worldwide economic downturn in 2020 and the massive printing and creation of money and credit, which coincided with various types of conflicts in the US (most obviously, protests related to racial injustice, and a very contentious presidential campaign). That brings us up to today.

**Looking back over the last four decades, China’s shift from isolation to opening up and from hard-core communism to “market reforms” and capitalism have had a greater impact on the economies of China, the US, and the rest of the world than anything else.** China transitioned from one of the most backward countries in the world to one of the two most powerful economically, technologically, militarily, and geopolitically. Most of that progress occurred during an era of peace and prosperity, when the leading empire wasn’t threatened and globalization and cooperation flourished. The period lasted until the bursting of the debt bubble in 2008, when the United States and much of the rest of the world became more nationalistic, protectionist, and confrontational, following the archetypical Big Cycle progression.

The results of China’s reform and opening up are reflected in the following table, which shows just a few representative statistics. Output per person has increased 25 times, the percentage of people living below the poverty line has fallen from 96 percent to less than 1 percent, life expectancy has increased by an average of about 10 years, and the average number of years of education has increased by 80 percent. I could go on and on, rattling off equally impressive statistics in virtually every area.

CHINA'S DEVELOPMENT SINCE 1949 AND 1978

1949

1978

2018

Δ Since 1949

Δ Since 1978

RGDP Per Capita*

348

609

15,243

44x

25x

Share of World GDP

2%

2%

22%

12x

11x

Population Below the Poverty Line ($1.90/Day)**

—

96%

1%

at least -96%

-96%

Life Expectancy

41

66

77

+36 Yrs

+11 Yrs

Infant Mortality Rate (per 1,000 Births)

200

53

7

-96%

-86%

Urbanization

18%

18%

59%

+41%

+41%

Literacy

47%

66%

97%

+50%

+31%

Avg Yrs of Education

1.7

4.4

7.9

+6.2 Yrs

+3.5 Yrs

*USD 2017, PPP-adjusted

**The World Bank only has poverty data back to 1981

While the indicators of China’s rise are broadly representative, they aren’t precise because the powers can’t be precisely measured. Take education, for example. While our index for education rises at a fairly brisk pace, it fails to fully capture the relative improvements in China because it is made up of average as well as total levels of education. This distortion is best conveyed in the next table. As you can see, while the average education level in China is considerably below the average education level in the US, China’s total number of people who have attained higher-level education is significantly greater than the United States’. Its total number of STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math) graduates is about three times the United States’. At the same time, there are reasons to believe that the average quality of Chinese education isn’t as high, especially at the college level. For example, in a recent ranking, only two Chinese universities appeared among the top 50 universities in the world (Tsinghua University at number 29 and Peking University at number 49) while 30 American universities did. This picture, in which the average of something in China is below the average of the same thing in the United States but the total in China is greater than the total in the US, is because the average level of development in China is lower while the Chinese population is more than four times as large as the American population. That comes across in a number of stats. For example, while the United States is militarily stronger in total all over the world, the Chinese appear to be militarily stronger in the East and South China Seas area, and there is a lot that is unknown about both countries’ military powers because they are kept secret.

UNITED STATES

CHINA

1980

Today

Change

Change (%)

1980

Today

Change

Change (%)

Average Years of Schooling

11.9

13.6

+1.7

+14%

4.6

7.9

+3.3

+72%

Govt Spending on Education (% of GDP)

5.30%

5.50%

0.20%

+4%

1.90%

5.20%

3.30%

+174%

Est Population w/ Tertiary Education (Mln)

25

60

+35

+140%

3

120

+117

+3,900%

Population w/ Tertiary Education (% Working-Age Pop)

17%

28%

11%

+68%

1%

12%

11%

+2,272%

Population w/ Tertiary Education (% World)

35%

15%

-20%

-57%

4%

31%

+27%

+590%

STEM Majors (Mln)

3

8

+5

+141%

1

21

+21

+4,120%

STEM Majors (% World)

29%

11%

-18%

-62%

5%

31%

+26%

+535%

**In conclusion, this modern era for China has led to some of the most rapid improvements in basic living conditions in history as well as an obvious climb in the factors that create powerful empires. In all respects, China is now a major and expanding power. Next we will turn to the US-China relationship in light of where it is now and what matters most to Americans and the Chinese.**

1 The entire report on China’s dynasties is available at economicprinciples.org.

2 Among the many inventions of the Song Dynasty were the moveable-type printing press, a compass for navigation, and paper currency.

3 China’s share of world GDP rose to 30 percent and the population more than doubled during the 1700s.

4 To clarify, most dynasties were minor, short-lived dynasties or regional dynasties that swiftly rose and fell during periods of instability in China. Different sources give different numbers for the total number of dynasties because it’s not even clear what constituted a minor or regional dynasty versus some other form of administration. Concerning the major dynasties, there were roughly nine that unified China and often ruled for extended periods. This group includes the five our case study focuses on from 600 to the present (the Tang, Song, Yuan, Ming, and Qing), and four from the 800 years prior (the Qin, Han, Jin, and Sui).

5 Typically, the “bad” emperors were distant from managing the affairs of the empire and tolerated—or even participated in—corruption while ignoring public investment needs. Several were known for greater ideological rigidity, for their poor judgement and the poor judgment of their top advisors, and for being preoccupied with the luxuries that their positions afforded them. The last emperors of most dynasties often came after the dynasty was already weakened and often had limited control or even involvement in political events (e.g., child emperors).

6 “God, grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, the courage to change the things I can, and the wisdom to know the difference.”

7 I’d like to thank Kevin Rudd, former prime minister of Australia and current president and CEO of the Asia Society Policy Institute, for pointing me to these books and helping me understand Chinese politics.

8 Because China’s population is about four times as large as the US’s, it only takes an income that is half as much per capita to have twice as much in total. There is nothing that I can see that stands in the way of China and the US having comparable per capita incomes over time, which would make China four times bigger.

9 The Made in China 2025 plan is for China to be largely self-sufficient in most areas and to be world leaders in high-tech fields, including artificial intelligence, robotics, semiconductors, pharmaceuticals, and aerospace.

10 In March 2021 China released their 14th Five-Year Plan and targets for 2035.

11 If you haven’t read Sun Tzu’s *The Art of War*, I suggest you do to get the flavor of what I am referring to.

12 In his excellent book *The Chinese World Order: Traditional China’s Foreign Relations*, the historian John Fairbank described China’s relations with non-Chinese states as follows: “The graded and concentric hierarchy of China’s foreign relations included other peoples and countries which we may group into three main zones—first, the Sinic Zone, consisting of the most nearby and culturally similar tributaries, Korea and Vietnam, parts of which had anciently been ruled within the Chinese empire, and also Liu-ch’iu (Ryuku) Islands and, at brief times, Japan. Secondly, the Inner Asian Zone, consisting of tributary tribes and states of the nomadic or seminomadic peoples of Inner Asia who were not only ethnically and culturally non-Chinese but were also outside or on the fringes of the Chinese cultural area, even though sometimes pressing upon the Great Wall frontier. Third, the Outer Zone, consisting of the ‘outer barbarians’ (wai-i) generally, at further distance overland or sea, including eventually Japan and other states of Southeast and South Asia and Europe that were supposed to send tribute when trading.”

13 I produced this diagram working with Professor Jiaming Zhu.

14 These promissory notes were similar to what today would be called a bill of exchange. Earlier promissory notes were denominated in variable units, but eventually government-issued notes were in fixed denominations. The government office issued these notes (known as jiaozi and huizi) in exchange for cash coins.

15 The devaluations in 1985–86 and 1993 came after a period of opening up trade and an expansion in Special Economic Zones. These openings created immense demand for foreign currency and imports to build production capacity—but it would still be a couple more years before those zones yielded much higher exports. That mismatch contributed to China’s growing current account deficit.

16 The massive Taiping Rebellion—one of the bloodiest wars in human history, which led to an estimated 20–30 million killed—caused a giant fiscal crisis that led to an issuance of debt that got monetized and led to high inflation.

17 Ji Chaozhu was raised in the United States until he was a junior at Harvard. His brother was close to Zhou Enlai, who sent the brother and Ji Chaozhu to the United States to try to build good relations with Americans. When the Korean War broke out he returned to China, became Zhou’s interpreter, and later served in the first Chinese delegation to the UN and as China’s ambassador to England. While he told me a lot that I won’t discuss to respect his privacy, I don’t believe that this is sensitive information.

18 I never ask questions that put them in the awkward position of having to choose between conveying confidential information and having to decline my request. I make it clear at all times that my sole desire is to understand and help.