# Chapter 13: US-China Relations and Wars

Chapter 13: US-China Relations and Wars

**

## CHAPTER 13 US-CHINA RELATIONS AND WARS
In this chapter I will be looking at the positions that the US and China now find themselves in and what being in these positions means for US-China relations. Because the US and China are now rival powers in a number of domains, they are in “conflicts” or “wars” in these domains, so I will be looking at where these stand. Because for the most part these are just new versions of old and classic conflicts (e.g., new technologies in a classic technology war, new weapons in a classic military war, etc.), I will be putting them in the context of what has happened repeatedly in history and with the timeless and universal principles we have learned from studying these cases.** While I will explore the range of possibilities that one might consider, I will be doing that without getting into what the future might look like. I will do that in the concluding chapter of this book. In this chapter I will also be moving a bit more from just conveying facts to sharing opinions (i.e., sharing my uncertain conjectures).

I am primarily focusing on US-China relations in this chapter, but in truth the game macro investors and global policy makers are playing is like multidimensional chess that requires each player to consider the many positions and possible moves of a number of key players (i.e., countries) that are also playing the game, with each of these players having a wide range of considerations (economic, political, military, etc.) that they have to weigh to make their moves well. The relevant other players that are now in this multidimensional game include Russia, Japan, India, other Asian countries, Australia, and European countries, and all of them have many considerations and constituents that will determine their moves. From playing the game I play—global macro investing—I know how complicated it is to simultaneously consider all that is relevant in order to make winning decisions. I also know that what I do is not as complicated as what those in the seats of power do and I know that I don’t have access to information that is as good as what they have, so it would be arrogant for me to think I know better than they do about what’s going on and how to best handle it. For those reasons I am offering my views with humility. With that equivocation I will tell you how I see the US-China relationship and the world setting in light of these wars, and I will be brutally honest.

### THE POSITIONS THE AMERICANS AND CHINESE ARE IN
**As I see it, destiny and the Big Cycle manifestations of it have put these two countries and their leaders in the positions they are now in. They led the United States to go through its mutually reinforcing Big Cycle successes, which led to excesses that led to weakening in a number of areas. Similarly they led China to go through its Big Cycle declines, which led to intolerably bad conditions that led to revolutionary changes and to the mutually reinforcing upswings that China is now in. So, the United States appears to be in decline and China appears to be on the rise for the all the classic reasons.**

Destiny and the big debt cycle led the US to find itself now in the late-cycle phase of the long-term debt cycle in which it has too much debt and needs to rapidly produce much more debt, which it can’t service with hard currency. So it has to monetize its debt in the classic late-cycle way of printing money to fund the government’s deficits. Ironically, and classically, being in this bad position is the consequence of the United States’ successes leading to these excesses. For example, **it is because of the United States’ great global successes that the US dollar became the world’s dominant reserve currency, which allowed Americans to borrow excessively from the rest of the world (including from China), which put the US in the tenuous position of owing other countries (including China) a lot of money which has put those other countries in the tenuous position of holding the debt of an overly indebted country that is rapidly increasing and monetizing its debt and that pays significantly negative real interest rates to those holding its debt.** In other words, it is because of the classic reserve currency cycle that China wanted to save a lot in the world’s reserve currency, which led it to lend so much to Americans who wanted to borrow so much, which has put the Chinese and the Americans in this awkward big debtor-creditor relationship when these wars are going on between them.

Destiny and the way the wealth cycle works, especially under capitalism, led to incentives and resources being put into place that allowed Americans to make great advances and produce great wealth—and eventually created the large wealth gaps that are now causing conflicts and threatening the domestic order and productivity that is required for the US to stay strong. **In China it was the classic collapse of its finances due to debt and money weaknesses, internal conflicts, and conflicts with foreign powers that led to its Big Cycle financial declines at the same time that the US was ascending**, and it was the extremity of these terrible conditions that produced the revolutionary changes that eventually led to the creation of incentives and market/capitalist approaches that produced China’s great advances, great wealth, and the large wealth gaps that it is understandably increasingly concerned about.

Similarly, destiny and the way the global power cycle works have now put the United States in the unfortunate position of having to choose between fighting to defend its position and its existing world order or retreating. For example, it is because the United States won the war in the Pacific in World War II that it, rather than any other country, will have to choose between defending Taiwan—most Americans don’t know where in the world it is or how to spell it—or retreating. It is because of that destiny and that global power cycle that the United States now has military bases in more than 70 countries in order to defend its world order even though it is uneconomical to do so.

* History has shown that all countries’ success depends on sustaining the strengthening forces without producing the excesses that lead to countries’ declines. The really successful countries have been able to do that in a big way for 200–300 years. No country has been able to do it forever.*

Thus far we’ve looked at the history of the last 500 years focusing especially on the rise and decline cycles of the Dutch, British, and American reserve currency empires and briefly at the last 1,400 years of China’s dynasties, which has brought us up to the present. The goal has been to put where we are in the context of the big-picture stories that got us here and to see the cause/effect patterns of how things work so that we can put where we are into better perspective. Now we need to drop down and look at where we are in more detail, hopefully without losing sight of that big picture. As we drop down, things that seem imperceptibly small in retrospect—Huawei, Hong Kong sanctions, closing consulates, moving battleships, unprecedented monetary policies, political fights, social conflicts, and many others—will at the time appear much larger, and we will find ourselves in the blizzard of them that comes at us every day. Each warrants more than a chapter-long examination, which I don’t intend to do here, but I will touch on the major issues.

**History has taught us that there are five major types of wars: 1) trade/economic wars, 2) technology wars, 3) geopolitical wars, 4) capital wars, and 5) military wars. To these I would add 6) culture wars and 7) the war with ourselves.** While all sensible people wish that these “wars” weren’t occurring and instead that cooperation was happening, we must be practical in recognizing that they exist. We should use past cases in history and our understandings of actual developments as they are taking place to think about what is most likely to happen next and how to deal with it well.

**We see these wars transpiring in varying degrees now. They should not be mistaken for individual conflicts but rather recognized as interrelated conflicts that are extensions of one bigger evolving conflict. In watching them transpire we need to observe and try to understand each side’s strategic goals**—e.g., are they trying to hasten a conflict (which some Americans think is best for the US because time is on China’s side because China is growing its strengths at a faster pace) or are they trying to ease the conflicts (because they believe that they would be better off if there is no war)? In order to prevent these conflicts from escalating out of control, it will be important for leaders of both countries to be clear about what the “red lines” and “trip wires” are that signal changes in the seriousness of the conflict.

Let’s now take a look at these wars with the lessons from history and the principles they provide in mind.

### THE TRADE/ECONOMIC WAR
**Like all wars, the trade war can go from being a polite dispute to being life-threatening, depending on how far the combatants want to take it.**

**Thus far we haven’t seen the US-China trade war taken very far.** It features classic tariffs and import restrictions that are reminiscent of those we have repeatedly seen in other similar periods of conflict (e.g., the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930). We have seen the trade negotiations and what they achieved reflected in a very limited “phase one” trade agreement from 2019 that was tentatively implemented. As we have seen, this “negotiation” was about testing each other’s powers rather than looking to global laws and judges (like the World Trade Organization) to achieve fair resolution. Tests of power are how all these wars will be fought. The big question is how far these tests of power will go and what form will they take.

**Beyond the trade dispute there are three major economic criticisms the US has about China’s handling of its economy:**

**1. The Chinese government pursues a wide range of evolving interventionist policies and practices** aimed at limiting market access for imported goods, services, and businesses, thus protecting its domestic industries by creating unfair practices.
**2. The Chinese offer significant government guidance, resources, and regulatory support to Chinese industries**, most notably including policies designed to extract advanced technologies from foreign companies, particularly in sensitive sectors.
**3. The Chinese are stealing intellectual property**, with some of this stealing believed to be state-sponsored and some of it believed to be outside the government’s direct control.

Generally speaking, the United States has responded both by trying to alter what the Chinese are doing (e.g., to get them to open their markets to Americans) and by doing its own versions of these things (closing American markets to the Chinese). Americans won’t admit to doing some of the things they are doing (e.g., taking intellectual property) any more than the Chinese will admit to doing them because the public relations costs of admitting to doing them are too great. When they are looking for supporters of their causes, all leaders want to appear to be the leaders of the army that is fighting for good against the evil army that is doing bad things. That is why we hear accusations from both sides that the other is doing evil things and no disclosures of the similar things that they are doing.

* When things are going well it is easy to keep the moral high ground. However, when the fighting gets tough, it becomes easier to justify doing that which was previously considered immoral (though rather than calling it immoral it is called moral).* As the fighting becomes tougher a dichotomy emerges between the idealistic descriptions of what is being done (which is good for public relations within the country) and the practical things that are being done to win. That is because in wars leaders want to convince their constituents that “we are good and they are evil” because that is the most effective way to rally people’s support, in some cases to the point that they are willing to kill or die for the cause. Though true, it is not easy to inspire people if a practical leader explains that “there are no laws in war” other than the ethical laws people impose on themselves and “we have to play by the same rules they play by or we will stupidly fight by self-imposing that we do it with one hand behind our backs.”

**I believe that we have pretty much seen the best trade agreement that we are going to see and that the risks of this war worsening are greater than the likelihood that they will lessen, and that we won’t see any treaty or tariff changes anytime soon from the Biden administration.** Whatever approach they eventually take will be a big influence on how Americans and the Chinese approach the Big Cycle destinies that are in the process of unfolding. As it now stands, the one thing—maybe the only thing—that both US political parties agree on is being hawkish on China. How hawkish and how exactly that hawkishness is expressed and reacted to by the Chinese are now unknown.

How could this war worsen?

**Classically, the most dangerous part of the trade/economic war comes when countries cut others off from essential imports.** The case study of the US and Japan leading up to World War II (found in Chapter 6) is a useful analogue to US-China circumstances because the geographies and the issues are analogous. For example, the US cutting off China’s imports of oil, other needed commodities, technologies, and/or other essential imports from the US or other countries would be clear and obvious signs of the war escalating. Likewise, China could escalate by cutting off companies like General Motors (which sells more cars in China than in the US) and Apple, or cutting off US imports of rare earth elements that are needed for the production of lots of high-tech items, automobile engines, and defense systems. I’m not saying such moves are likely, but I do want to be clear that **moves to cut off essential imports from either side would signal a major escalation that could lead to a much worse conflict**. If that doesn’t happen, evolution will take its normal course so international balances of payments will evolve primarily based on each country’s evolving competitiveness.

For these reasons **both countries, especially China, are shifting to more domestic production and “decoupling.”**1 As President Xi has said, the world is “undergoing changes not seen in a century” and “[i]n the face of an external environment characterized by rising protectionism, global economic downturn, and a shrinking international market… [China must] give full play to the advantage of a huge domestic market.” Over the last 40 years it has acquired the abilities to do this. Over the next five years we should see both countries become more independent from each other. The rate of reducing one’s dependencies that can be cut off will be much greater for China over the next five to 10 years than for the United States.

### THE TECHNOLOGY WAR
**The technology war is much more serious than the trade/economic war because whoever wins the technology war will probably also win the military wars and all the other wars.**

The US and China are now the dominant players in the world’s big tech sectors and these big tech sectors are the industries of the future. **The Chinese tech sector has rapidly developed domestically to serve the Chinese in China and to become a competitor in world markets. At the same time China remains highly dependent on technologies from the United States and other countries.** That makes the United States vulnerable to the increased development and competition of Chinese technologies and makes the Chinese vulnerable to being cut off from essential technologies.

**The United States appears now to have greater technology** **abilities overall, though it varies by type of technology and the US is losing its lead.** For example, while the US is ahead in advanced AI chip development, it is behind in 5G. As an imperfect reflection of the present stage of the US’s advantage, the market capitalizations of US tech companies in total are about four times the size of China’s. This calculation understates China’s relative strength because it doesn’t include some of the big private companies (like Huawei and Ant Group) and the non-company (i.e., government) technology developments, which are larger in China than they are in the United States. The largest public Chinese tech companies (Tencent and Alibaba) are already the seventh and eighth largest technology companies in the world, right behind some of the largest US “FAAMG” stocks. Some of the most important technology areas are being led by the Chinese. Consider that 40 percent of the world’s largest civilian supercomputers are now in China, and it is leading in some dimensions of the AI/big data race and some dimensions of the quantum computing/encryption/communications race. Similar leads in other technologies exist, such as in fintech where the volume of e-commerce transactions and mobile-based payments in China is the highest in the world and well ahead of that in the US. There are likely technologies that even the US’s most informed intelligence services don’t know about that are being developed in secret.

**China will probably advance its technologies, and the quality of decision making that is enabled by them, faster than the US will because big data + big AI + big computing = superior decision making.** The Chinese are collecting vastly more data per person than is collected in the US (and they have more than four times as many people), and they are investing heavily in AI and big computing to make the most of it. The amount of resources that are being poured into these and other technology areas is far greater than those in the US. As for providing money, both venture capitalists and the government are providing virtually unlimited amounts to Chinese developers. As for providing people, the number of science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) graduates that are coming out of college and pursuing tech careers in China is about eight times that in the US. The United States has an overall technology lead (though it is behind in some areas) and of course has some big hubs for new innovations, especially in its top universities and its big tech companies. While the US isn’t out of the game, its relative position is declining because China’s technological innovation abilities are improving at a faster pace. Remember that China is a country whose leaders 37 years ago marveled at the handheld calculators I gave them. Imagine where they might be 37 years from now.

**To fight the technology threats, the United States has responded at times by preventing Chinese companies (like Huawei) from operating in the United States, trying to undermine their usage internationally, and possibly hurting their viability through sanctions that prevent them from getting items needed for production.** Is the United States doing that because China is using these companies to spy in the United States and elsewhere, because the United States is worried about them and other Chinese technology companies being more competitive, and/or because they are retaliating for the Chinese not allowing American tech companies to have free access to the Chinese market? While that is debatable, there is no doubt that these and other Chinese companies are becoming more competitive at a fast pace. In response to this competitive threat the United States is moving to contain or kill threatening tech companies. Interestingly, while the United States is cutting off access to intellectual property now, it would have had a much greater power to do so not long ago because the United States had so much more intellectual property relative to others. China has started to do the same to the United States, which will increasingly hurt because Chinese IP is becoming better in many ways.

**Regarding the stealing of technologies, while it is generally agreed to be a big threat,**2 **it does not fully explain actions taken against Chinese tech companies.** If a company is breaking a law within a country (e.g., Huawei in the US) one would expect to see that crime prosecuted legally so one could see the evidence that shows the spying devices embedded within the technologies. We aren’t seeing this. Fear of growing competitiveness is as large, or larger, a motivator of the attacks on Chinese technology companies, but one can’t expect policy makers to say that. American leaders can’t admit that the competitiveness of US technology is slipping and can’t argue against allowing free competition to the American people, who for ages have been taught to believe that competition is both fair and the best process for producing the best results.

Stealing intellectual property has been going on for as long as there has been recorded history and has always been difficult to prevent. As we saw in earlier chapters, the British did it to the Dutch and the Americans did it to the British. “Stealing” implies breaking a law. When the war is between countries there are no laws, judges, or juries to resolve disputes and the real reasons decisions are made aren’t always disclosed by those who are making them. I don’t mean to imply that the reasons behind the United States’ aggressive actions are not good ones; I don’t know if they are. I’m just saying that they might not be exactly as stated. Protectionist policies have long existed to insulate companies from foreign competition. Huawei’s technology is certainly threatening because it’s better in some ways than American technology. Look at Alibaba and Tencent and compare them with American equivalents. Americans might ask why these companies are not competing in the US. It is mostly for the same reasons that Amazon and a number of other American tech companies aren’t freely competing in China. In any case, **there is a tech decoupling going on that is part of the greater decoupling of China and the US, which will have a huge impact on what the world will look like in five years**.

What would a worsening of the tech war look like?

**The United States has a technology lead (though it’s shrinking fast). As a result, the Chinese currently have great dependencies on imported technologies from both US and non-US sources that the US can influence. This creates a great vulnerability for China, which in turn creates a great weapon for the United States.** It most obviously exists in advanced semiconductors, though it exists in other technologies as well. The dynamic with the world’s leading chip maker—Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, which provides the Chinese and the world with needed chips, and which can be influenced by the United States—is one of many interesting dynamics to watch, especially since it is located in Taiwan. There are many such Chinese technology imports that are essential to China’s well-being and many fewer American imports from China that are essential to the United States’ well-being. **If the United States shuts off Chinese access to essential technologies, that would signal a major step up in the risk of a shooting war.** On the other hand, if events continue to transpire as they have been transpiring, China is poised to be much more independent and in a much stronger position than the United States technologically in five to 10 years, at which time we will likely see these technologies much more decoupled. This picture changes by the day, and it is important to stay on top of it.

### THE GEOPOLITICAL WAR
**Sovereignty, especially as it relates to the Chinese mainland, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the East and South China Seas, is probably China’s biggest issue. Beyond these are several other areas of strategic economic importance, such as those countries involved in China’s Belt and Road Initiative.**

As you might imagine, the Century of Humiliation in the 19th century and the invasions by foreign “barbarians” during it gave Mao and the Chinese leaders to this day compelling motivations to have complete sovereignty within their borders, get back the parts of China that were taken away from them (e.g., Taiwan and Hong Kong), and never again be so weak that they can be pushed around by foreign powers. China’s desire for sovereignty and for maintaining its distinct ways of doing things (i.e., its culture) are why the Chinese reject American demands for them to change Chinese internal policies (e.g., to be more democratic, to handle the Tibetans and Uighurs differently, to change its approach to Hong Kong and Taiwan, etc.). In private some Chinese point out that they don’t dictate how the United States should treat people within its borders. They also believe that the United States and European countries are culturally prone to proselytizing—i.e., to imposing on others their values, Judeo-Christian beliefs, morals, and ways of operating—and that this inclination has developed through the millennia, since before the Crusades.

To the Chinese the sovereignty risk and the proselytizing risk make a dangerous combination that could threaten China’s ability to be all it can be by following the approaches that it believes are best. The Chinese believe that their having sovereignty and the ability to approach things the way that they believe is best as determined by their hierarchical governance structure is sacrosanct. Regarding the sovereignty issue, they also point out that there are reasons for them to believe that the United States would topple their government—the Chinese Communist Party—if it could, which is also intolerable.3 These are the biggest existential threats that I believe the Chinese would fight to the death to defend and the United States must be careful in dealing with China if it wants to prevent a hot war. For issues not involving sovereignty, I believe the Chinese expect to look to influence them nonviolently and avoid a hot war.

**Probably the most dangerous sovereignty issue is Taiwan.** Many Chinese people believe that the United States will never follow through with its implied promise to allow Taiwan and China to unite, unless the US is forced to do so. They point out that when the US sells the Taiwanese F-16 fighter jets and other weapons systems it sure doesn’t look like the United States is facilitating the peaceful reunification of China. As a result, they believe that the only way to ensure that China is safe and united is to have the power to oppose the US in the hope that the US will sensibly acquiesce when faced with a greater Chinese power. My understanding is that China is now stronger militarily in that region of the world. Also, the Chinese military is likely to get stronger at a faster pace, though deterrence through mutually assured destruction is most likely the case. So, as I mentioned earlier, **I would worry a lot if we were to see an emerging fight over sovereignty, especially if we were to see a “Fourth Taiwan Strait Crisis.”** Would the US fight to defend Taiwan? Uncertain. The US not fighting would be a great geopolitical win for China and a great humiliation for the US. It would signal the decline of the US Empire in the Pacific and beyond in much the same way as the British loss of the Suez Canal signaled the end of the British Empire in the Middle East and beyond. The implications of that would extend well beyond that loss. For example, in the British case it signaled the end of the pound as a reserve currency. The more of a show the US makes of defending Taiwan the greater the humiliation of a lost war or a retreat would be. That is concerning because the United States has been making quite a show of defending Taiwan while destiny appears to be bringing a direct conflict to a head before long. If the US does fight, I believe that a war with China over Taiwan that costs American lives would be very unpopular in the US and the US would probably lose that fight, so the big question is whether that would lead to a broader war. That scares everyone. Hopefully the fear of that great war and the destruction it would produce, like the fear of mutually assured destruction, will prevent it.

At the same time, from my discussions **it is my belief that China has a strong desire not to have a hot war with the US or to forcibly control other countries (as distinct from having the desire to be all it can be and to influence countries within its region)**. I know that the Chinese leadership understands how terrible a hot war would be and worries about unintentionally slipping into one, à la World War I. They would much prefer a cooperative relationship if such a relationship is possible, and, I suspect, they would happily divide the world into different spheres of influence. Still they have their “red lines” (i.e., limits to what can be compromised on that if crossed would lead to a hot war) and they expect more challenging times ahead. For example, as President Xi said in his 2019 New Year’s address, “Looking at the world at large, we are facing a period of major change never seen in a century. No matter what these changes bring, China will remain resolute and confident in its defense of national sovereignty and security.”4

**Regarding influence around the world, for both the United States and China there are certain areas that each finds most important, primarily on the bases of proximity (they care most about countries and areas closest to them) and/or of obtaining essentials (they care most about not being cut off from essential minerals and technologies), and to a lesser extent of their export markets.** The areas that are most important to the Chinese are first those that they consider to be part of China, second those on their borders (in the China seas) and those in key supply lanes (Belt and Road countries) or those that are suppliers of key imports, and third other countries of economic or strategic importance for partnerships.

Over the past few years China has significantly expanded its activities in these strategically important countries, especially Belt and Road countries, resource-rich developing countries, and some developed countries. This is greatly affecting geopolitical relations. These activities are economic and are occurring via increasing investments in targeted countries (e.g., loans, purchases of assets, building infrastructure facilities such as roads and stadiums, and providing military and other support to countries’ leaders) while the US is receding from providing aid to these places. This economic globalization has been so extensive that most countries have had to think hard about their policies regarding allowing the Chinese to buy assets within their borders.

**Generally speaking, the Chinese appear to want tributary-like relationships with most non-rival countries, though the closer their proximity to China, the greater the influence China wants over them. In reaction to these changing circumstances most countries, in varying degrees, are wrestling with the question of whether it is better to be aligned with the United States or with China, with** **those in closest proximity needing to give the most consideration to this question.** In discussions with leaders from different parts of the world I have repeatedly heard it said that there are two overriding considerations—economic and military. They almost all say that if they were to choose on the basis of economics, they would choose China because China is more important to them economically (in trade and capital flows), while if they were to choose on the basis of military support, the United States has the edge but the big question is whether the United States will be there to protect them militarily when they need it. Most doubt that the US will fight for them, and some in the Asia-Pacific region question whether the US has the power to win.

The economic benefits that China is providing these countries is significant and is working in a way that is broadly similar to the way the United States provided economic benefits to key countries after World War II to help secure the desired relationships. It was not many years ago that there were no significant rivals to the United States, so it was quite easy for the United States to simply express its wishes and find that most countries would comply; the only rival powers were the Soviet Union (which in hindsight wasn’t much of a rival) and its allies and a few of the developing countries that were not economic rivals. **Over the last few years Chinese influence over other countries has been expanding while US influence has been receding.** That is also true in multilateral organizations—e.g., the United Nations, the IMF, the World Bank, the World Trade Organization, the World Health Organization, and the International Court of Justice—most of which were set up by the United States at the beginning of the American world order. As the United States has been pulling back from them, these organizations are weakening and China is playing a greater role in them.

**Over the next five to 10 years, in addition to there being decoupling in other areas, we will be seeing which countries align themselves with each of these leading powers.** Beyond money and military power, how China and the US interact with other countries (how they use their soft powers) will influence how these alliances will be made. Style and values will matter. For example, during the Trump years I heard leaders around the world describe both countries’ leaders as “brutal.” While you don’t hear that as much with President Biden, other countries broadly fear that they will be punished if they don’t do exactly what these two countries’ leaders want, and they don’t like it to the point of being driven into the other’s arms. **It will be important to see what these alliances will look like because throughout history, as we’ve seen, the most powerful country is typically taken down by alliances of countries that are less powerful but collectively stronger.**

Perhaps the most interesting relationship to watch is between China and Russia. Since the new world order began in 1945, among China, Russia, and the United States, two out of the three have become allied to attempt to neutralize or overpower the third. Russia and China each has a lot of what the other needs (natural resources and military equipment for China from Russia and financing for Russia from China). Also, because Russia is militarily strong it would be a good military ally. We can start to see this happening by watching where the countries line up on the issues; for example, whether to allow Huawei in, with the United States or China.

**In addition to the international political risks and opportunities, there are of course big domestic political risks and opportunities in both countries. That is because there are different factions who are fighting for control of both governments and there will inevitably be changes in leadership that will produce changes in policies.** While nearly impossible to anticipate, whoever is in charge will be faced with the challenges that now exist and that are unfolding in the Big Cycle ways we have been discussing. Since all leaders (and all other participants in these evolutionary cycles, including all of us) step on and get off at different parts of these cycles, they (and we) face a certain set of likely situations to be encountered. Since other people in history have stepped on and off at the same parts of past cycles, by studying what these others encountered and how they handled their encounters at the analogous stages, and by using some logic, we can imperfectly imagine the range of possibilities.

### THE CAPITAL WAR
**As history has shown, one of the biggest risks in a conflict is that access to one’s money/capital can be shut off. This can happen by a) the moves of one’s opponents and/or b) self-inflicted harmful actions (e.g., getting into too much debt and devaluing one’s money) that lead those who provide capital to not want to provide it.** In Chapter 6, I reviewed classic capital war moves. Some of these are now being used and could be used in a more forceful way, so they have to be watched closely.

**The goal in a capital war is to cut the enemy off from capital because no money = no power.**

The degrees to which these things occur correspond to the severity of the conflict. “Sanctions” as they are now called and employed come in many forms, with the broad categories being financial, economic, diplomatic, and military. Within each of these categories there are many versions and applications. I’m not going to delve into the various versions and targets because that would be too much of a digression.

The main things to know are:

**The United States’ greatest power comes from having the world’s leading reserve currency, which gives the US enormous buying power because it gives it the ability a) to print the world’s money and have it widely accepted abroad and b) to control who gets it.**
**The United States is at risk of losing its reserve currency status.**

The US dollar remains the dominant world reserve currency because it is used for trade, global capital transactions, and reserves much more than any other currency. History and logic show that the leading reserve currency is slow to be replaced for the same reasons that the leading world language is slow to be replaced—because so many people have adopted it and because it is entwined within the system. The existing positions of reserve currencies as reflected by the amounts held by central banks are shown here:

SHARE OF CENTRAL BANK RESERVES BY CURRENCY

USD

51%

EUR

20%

Gold

12%

JPY

6%

GBP

5%

CNY

2%

Based on data through 2019

**Because the dollar is the dominant currency in world trade, capital flows, and reserves, it is the world’s leading reserve currency, which puts the US in the enviable position of being able to print the world’s money and to inflict sanctions on its enemies. The US now has an arsenal of sanctions, which is its most used arsenal of weapons.** As of 2019, there were approximately 8,000 US sanctions in place targeted at individuals, companies, and governments. Through these powers the US can get the money it needs and it can cut off opposing countries from getting money and credit by preventing financial institutions and others from dealing with them. These sanctions are by no means perfect or all-encompassing, but they are generally effective.

The United States is at risk of losing its dominant position as a reserve currency because:

**The amounts of dollar-denominated debt in foreigners’ portfolios, such as central bank reserves and sovereign wealth funds, are disproportionately large based on a number of measures of what the size of reserve currency holdings should be.**5
**The US government and the US central bank are increasing the amounts of dollar-denominated debt and money at an extraordinarily fast pace, so it will likely be hard to find adequate demand for US debt without the Federal Reserve having to monetize a lot of it, while at the same time the financial incentives to hold this debt are unattractive because the US government is paying a negligible nominal yield and a negative real yield on it.**
**Holding debt as a medium of exchange or as a storehold of wealth during wartime is less desirable than during peacetime, so if there were movements toward war, the value of debt (which is a promise to receive fiat currency) and fiat currency would likely go down relative to other things.** This is not currently an issue but would become one if wars intensify.
**The roughly $1 trillion of US debt that China holds is a risk but not an unmanageable one as that equals only around 4 percent of the roughly $28 trillion outstanding (as of May** **2021). However, because other countries realize that actions taken against China could be taken against them, any actions taken against Chinese holdings of dollar assets would likely increase the perceived risks of holding dollar-debt assets by other holders of these assets, which would reduce the demand for such assets.** This is not currently an issue though it appears to be close to becoming an issue.
**The dollar’s role as a reserve currency largely depends on its being freely exchanged between countries, so to the extent that the US might in the future put controls on its flows and/or run monetary policy in ways that are contrary to the world’s interests in pursuit of its own interests, that would make the dollar less desirable as the world’s leading reserve currency.** This is not currently an issue but will become one if foreign exchange controls are raised as a possibility, which is typical at the next stage of the cycle.
**Countries being hurt by US sanctions are developing ways to get around them or undermining the United States’ power to impose them.** For example, Russia and China, which both are encountering these sanctions and are at great risk of encountering more of them in the future, are each now developing and cooperating with the other to develop an alternative payment system. China’s central bank has created a digital currency, which will make China less exposed to US sanctions.

**There are no good currency alternatives because:**

**The dollar (51 percent of central bank reserves)** has weakening fundamentals in the way described in Chapter 11, which I won’t repeat here.
**The euro (20 percent)** is a weakly structured fiat currency made by smaller, uncoordinated countries with weak finances that are tenuously held together by a highly fragmented currency union. Because the European Union is financially, economically, and militarily at best a secondary power, buying its currency and debt denominated in its currency, which its central bank is free to print, is not an enticing thing to do.
**Gold (12 percent)** is a hard currency that is held because it has worked the best over the ages and because it is an effective diversifier to other assets held, particularly fiat currencies. While before 1971 gold was at the foundation of the world’s currency system, at this time it is a relatively dead asset since there are no significant international trade and capital transactions in it and it isn’t used to balance external accounts. It is also a market that is too small to become a high share of wealth at current prices. A move to gold from fiat-currency-based assets (i.e., credit assets), which would only come in the event of an abandonment of that system (which history shows could come), would lead to an explosion in gold’s price.
**The yen (6 percent)** is a fiat currency that is also not widely used internationally by non-Japanese people and suffers from a lot of the same problems that the dollar has including having too much debt that is increasing quickly and being monetized so that it is paying unattractive interest rates. Also Japan is only a moderate global economic power and is a weak military power.
**The pound (5 percent)** is an anachronistically held fiat currency that has relatively weak fundamentals, and the UK is relatively weak in almost all of our measures of a country’s economic/geopolitical power.
**The renminbi (2 percent)** is the only fiat currency to be chosen as a reserve currency because of its fundamentals. China’s potential is sizable. Its shares of world trade, world capital flows, and world GDP are roughly equal to the United States’.6 China has managed its currency to be relatively stable against other currencies and against goods and services prices, it has large foreign exchange reserves, it doesn’t have a 0 percent interest rate and a negative real interest rate, and it isn’t printing and monetizing a lot of debt. Increasing investments in China strengthens the currency because those purchases have to be made in its currency. Those are the positives. The negatives are that China has a relatively large amount of domestic debt that has to be restructured, the renminbi is not a currency that is widely used for global trade and financial transactions, China’s clearing system is undeveloped, and money is not allowed to freely flow in and out of the currency.

**So there are no attractive world reserve currencies to compete with the dollar.**

* History has shown that whenever a) currencies are not desired and b) there are no other currencies that are attractive to go into, the currencies are still devalued and the capital finds its way into other investments (e.g., gold, commodities, stocks, property, etc.). As a result, there is no need to have a strong alternative currency for a devaluation of a currency to take place.*

**Things will change. To the extent that the United States and China are in a capital war, the development of Chinese currency and capital markets would be detrimental for the United States and beneficial for China. Without the US attacking China’s currency and capital markets in an attempt to weaken them, and/or the Chinese hurting their own currency and capital markets (by making policy shifts that make these markets less attractive), China’s currency and capital markets will probably develop quickly to increasingly compete with US markets. It is up to American policy makers to decide whether or not they will try to disrupt this evolutionary path by becoming more aggressive or accept that evolution, which will likely lead to China becoming relatively stronger, more self-sufficient, and less vulnerable to being squeezed by the US.** Though the Chinese have less power to hurt the US dollar and its capital markets, and its best moves would be to strengthen its own currency, there are some possibilities that it will attempt to harm the dollar.

As explained in my study of past cycles, the war typically intensifies as the cycle progresses. Comparing historical cases with their modern-day equivalents—e.g., moves by the US and Japan prior to World War II with moves by the US and China now—should be helpful as the cycle progresses.

### THE MILITARY WAR
I am not a military expert but I get to speak with military experts and I do research on the subject, so I will pass along what has been shared with me. Take it or leave it as you wish.

* It is impossible to visualize what the next major military war will be like, though it probably will be much worse than most people imagine.* That is because a lot of weaponry has been developed in secret and because the creativity and capabilities to inflict pain have grown enormously in all forms of warfare since the last time the most powerful weapons were used and seen in action. There are now more types of warfare than one can imagine and, within each, more weapons systems than anyone knows. While of course nuclear warfare is a scary prospect, I have heard equally scary prospects of biological, cyber, chemical, space, and other types of warfare. Many of these are untested so there is a lot of uncertainty about how they would go.

Based on what we do know **the headline is that the United States and China’s geopolitical war in the East and South China Seas is escalating militarily because both sides are testing the other’s limits. China is now militarily stronger than the United States in the East and South China Seas so the US would probably lose a war in that region, while the United States is stronger around the world and overall and would probably “win” a bigger war.** But a bigger war is too complicated to imagine well because of the large number of unknowns, including how other countries would behave in it and what technologies secretly exist. The only thing that most informed people agree on is that such a war would be unimaginably horrible.

Also notable, China’s rate of improvement in its military power, like its other rates of improvement, has been extremely fast, especially over the last 10 years, and the future rate is expected to be even faster, even more so if China’s economic and technological improvements continue to outpace those of the United States. **Some people imagine that China could achieve broad military superiority in five to 10 years. I don’t know if that is true.**

**As for potential locations of military conflict, Taiwan, the East and South China Seas, and North Korea are the hottest spots, and India and Vietnam are the next** (for reasons I won’t digress into).

As far as a big hot war between the United States and China is concerned, it would include all the previously mentioned types of wars plus more pursued at their maximums because, in a fight for survival, each would throw all it has at the other, the way other countries throughout history have. It would be World War III, and World War III would likely be much deadlier than World War II, which was much deadlier than World War I because of the technological advances in the ways we can hurt each other.

Proxy wars are also part of the picture and should be watched as they are very effective in chipping away at a leading world power’s strength and global influence.

In thinking about the timing of a war, I keep in mind the principles that: * when countries have big internal disorder, it is an opportune moment for opposing countries to aggressively exploit their vulnerabilities.* For example, the Japanese made their moves to invade China in the 1930s when China was divided and exhausted by its ongoing civil war.

* History has taught us that when there are leadership transitions and/or weak leadership at the same time that there is big internal conflict, the risk of the enemy making an offensive move should be considered elevated.* Because time is on China’s side, if there is to be a war, it is in the interest of the Chinese to have it later (e.g., five to 10 years from now when it will likely be stronger and more self-sufficient) and in the interest of the US to have it sooner.

I’m now going to add two other types of war—the culture war, which will drive how each side will approach these circumstances, including what they would rather die for than give up, and the war with ourselves, which will determine how effective we are and which will lead us to be strong or weak in the critical ways we explored in Chapter 1.

### THE CULTURE WAR
* How people are with each other is of paramount importance in determining how they will handle the circumstances that they jointly face, and the cultures that they have will be the biggest determinants of how they are with each other.* What Americans and the Chinese value most and how they think people should be with each other determine how they will deal with each other in addressing the conflicts that we just explored. Because Americans and the Chinese have different values and cultural norms that they will fight and die for, if we are going to get through our differences peacefully it is important that both sides understand what these are and how to deal with them well.

As described earlier, **Chinese culture compels its leaders and society to make most decisions from the top down, demanding high standards of civility, putting the collective interest ahead of individual interests, requiring each person to know their role and how to play it well, and having filial respect for those superior in the hierarchy. They also seek “rule by the proletariat,” which in common parlance means that opportunities and rewards are broadly distributed. In contrast, American culture compels its leaders to run the country from the bottom up, demanding high levels of personal freedom, favoring individualism over collectivism, admiring revolutionary thinking and behavior, and not respecting people for their positions as much as for the quality of their thinking. These core cultural values drove the types of economic and political systems each country chose.**

To be clear, most of these differences aren’t obvious in day-to-day life; they generally aren’t very important relative to the shared beliefs that Americans and the Chinese have, which are numerous, and they aren’t held by all Chinese or all Americans, which is why many Americans are comfortable living in China and vice versa. Also, they are not pervasive. For example, the Chinese in other domains, such as Singapore, Taiwan, and Hong Kong, have had governance systems that are similar to Western democratic systems. Still these cultural differences subtly affect most everything, and in times of great conflict, they are the defining differences that determine whether the parties fight or peacefully resolve their disputes. **The main challenge the Chinese and Americans have with each other arises from some of them failing to understand and empathize with the other’s values and ways of doing things, and not allowing each other to do what they think is best.**

While the opening up of both countries has increased their interactions and their increasingly shared practices (e.g., their similar economic freedoms that produce similar desires, products, and outcomes) have made both environments and their people much more similar than they ever were before, the differences in approaches are still notable. They are reflected in how each country’s government and its people interact with each other and how Americans and the Chinese interact especially at the leader-to-policy-maker level. **Some of these cultural differences are minor and some of them are so major that many people would fight to the death over them**—e.g., most Americans believe in “give me liberty or give me death” while to the Chinese individual liberty isn’t nearly as important as collective stability is.

These differences are also reflected in everyday life. For example, the Chinese government, being more paternal, regulates what types of video games children play and how many hours a day they can play them, whereas in the United States video games aren’t government-regulated because such things are considered an individual parent’s decision to make. One could argue the merits of either approach.

The Chinese hierarchical culture makes it natural for the Chinese to simply accept the government’s direction, while the American nonhierarchical culture makes it acceptable for Americans to fight with their government over what to do. Similarly, different cultural inclinations influenced how Americans and the Chinese reacted to being told that they had to wear masks in response to COVID-19, which led to second-order consequences because the Chinese followed the instructions and Americans often didn’t, affecting the numbers of cases and deaths and the economic impact. These culturally determined differences in how things are handled affect how the Chinese and Americans react differently to many things— information privacy, free speech, free media, etc.—which add up to lots of ways that the countries operate differently.

While there are pros and cons to these different cultural approaches, and I’m not going to explore them here, I do want to get across that **the cultural differences that make Americans American and the Chinese Chinese are deeply embedded**. Given China’s impressive track record and how deeply imbued the culture behind it is, there is no more chance of the Chinese giving up their values and their system than there is of Americans giving up theirs. Trying to force the Chinese and their systems to be more American would, to them, mean subjugation of their most fundamental beliefs, which they would fight to the death to protect. To have peaceful coexistence Americans must understand that the Chinese believe that their values and their approaches to living out these values are best, as much as Americans believe their American values and their ways of living them out are best.

For example, one should accept the fact that when choosing leaders most Chinese believe that having capable, wise leaders make the choices is preferable to having the general population make the choice on a “one person, one vote” basis because they believe that the general population is less informed and less capable. Most believe that the general population will choose the leaders on whims and based on what those seeking to be elected will give them in order to buy their support rather than what’s best for them. Also, they believe—like Plato believed and as has happened in a number of countries—that democracies are prone to slip into dysfunctional anarchies during very bad times when people fight over what should be done rather than support a strong, capable leader.

They also believe that their system of choosing leaders lends itself to better multigenerational strategic decision making because any one leader’s term is only a small percentage of the time that is required to progress along its long-term developmental arc.7 They believe that what is best for the collective is most important and best for the country and is best determined by those at the top. Their system of governance is more like what is typical in big companies, especially multigenerational companies, so they wonder why it is hard for Americans and other Westerners to understand the rationale for the Chinese system following this approach and to see the challenges of the democratic decision-making process as the Chinese see them.

To be clear, I’m not seeking to explore the relative merits of these decision-making systems. **I am simply trying to make clear that there are arguments on both sides and to help Americans and the Chinese see things through each other’s eyes and, most importantly, to understand that the choice is between accepting, tolerating, and even respecting each other’s right to do what each thinks is best or having the Chinese and Americans fight to the death over what they believe is uncompromisable.**

The American and Chinese economic and political systems are different because of the differences in their histories and the differences in their cultures that have resulted from these histories. As far as economics is concerned the two different viewpoints—the classic left (favoring government ownership of the means of production, the poor, the redistribution of wealth, etc., which the Chinese call communism) and the classic right (favoring private ownership of the means of production, whoever succeeds in the system, and much more limited redistributions of wealth)—exist in China as in the rest of the world, and there have been swings from one to the other in all societies, especially in China, so it would not be correct to say that the Chinese are culturally left or right. Similar swings in American preferences have existed throughout its much more limited history. I suspect that if the United States had a longer history we would have seen wider swings, as we have in Europe through its longer history.

For these reasons these “left” versus “right” inclinations appear to be more big cycle swings around revolutionary trends than evolving core values. In fact, we are seeing these swings now taking place in both countries, so it’s not a big stretch to say that policies of the “right,” such as capitalism, are close to being more favored in China than in the United States and vice versa. In any case, when it comes to economic systems, there don’t appear to be a lot of clear distinctions rooted in deep cultural preferences. In contrast to economic systems, the inclination of the Chinese to be top-down/hierarchical versus bottom-up/nonhierarchical appears to be deeply embedded in their culture and in their political systems while Americans are strongly inclined to be bottom-up/nonhierarchical. As for which approach will work best and win out in the end, I will leave that for others to debate, hopefully without bias, though I will note that most knowledgeable observers of history have concluded that neither of these systems is always good or bad. * What works best varies according to a) the circumstances and b) how people using these systems are with each other. No system will sustainably work well—in fact all will break down—if the individuals in it don’t respect it more than what they individually want and if the system is not flexible enough to bend with the times without breaking.*

**As we imagine how Americans and the Chinese will handle their shared challenge to evolve in the best possible way on this shared planet, I try to imagine where their strong cultural inclinations, most importantly where the irreconcilable differences that they would rather die for than give up, will lead them.** For example, most Americans and most Westerners would fight to the death for the ability to have and express their opinions, including their political opinions. In contrast, the Chinese value the respect for authority more, which is reflected in and demonstrated by the relative powers of individuals and the organizations they belong to and the responsibility to hold the collective organization responsible for the actions of individuals in the collective.

Such a culture clash took place in October 2019 when the then-general manager of the Houston Rockets (Daryl Morey) tweeted an image expressing support for Hong Kong’s pro-democracy protest movement. He quickly pulled down his tweet and explained that his views weren’t representative of his team’s views or the NBA’s views. Morey was then attacked by the American side (i.e., the press, politicians, and the public) for not standing up for free speech, and the Chinese side held the whole league responsible and punished it by dropping all NBA games from China’s state television, pulling NBA merchandise from online stores, and reportedly demanding that the league fire Morey.

This clash arose because of how important free speech is to Americans and because Americans believe that the organization should not be punished for the actions of the individual. The Chinese, on the other hand, believe that the harmful attack needed to be punished and that the group should be held accountable for the actions of the individuals in it. One can imagine much bigger cases in which much bigger conflicts arise due to such differences in deep-seated beliefs about how people should be with each other.

**When they are in a superior position, the Chinese tend to want a) the relative positions to be clear (i.e., the party in a subordinate position knows that it is in a subordinate position), b) the subordinate party to obey, and c) the subordinate party to know that, if it doesn’t do so, it will be punished.** That is the cultural inclination/style of Chinese leadership. They can also be wonderful friends who will provide support when needed. For example, when the governor of Connecticut was desperate to get personal protective equipment in the first big wave of COVID-19 illnesses and deaths and couldn’t get it from the US government or other American sources, I turned to my Chinese friends for help and they provided what was needed, which was a lot. As China goes global a number of countries’ leaders (and their populations) have been both grateful for and put off by China’s acts of generosity and strict punishments. Some of these cultural differences can be negotiated to the parties’ mutual satisfaction, but some of the most important ones will be very difficult to negotiate away.

**I think the main thing to realize and accept is that the Chinese and Americans have different values and will make different choices for themselves than the other would like.** For example, Americans might not like how the Chinese handle their human rights issues and the Chinese might not like how Americans handle their human rights issues. The question is: what should be done about that—should Americans fight with the Chinese to impose what they think the Chinese should do on them and vice versa, or should they agree not to intervene into what each other does? In my opinion it is too difficult, inappropriate, and probably impossible to force others in other countries to do what they strongly believe is not good for them. **The United States’ ability to impose things on the Chinese and China’s ability to impose things on the United States will be a function of their relative powers.**

While I just explored the US-China war issues conveying the little that I know about them relative to what I need to know, I want to remind you that these wars are far more complex than one-to-one conflicts. They are like multidimensional chess games because many countries are involved with many other countries in many dimensions. For example, when I think of US-China relations I have to think way beyond their bilateral relations to think about their multilateral relationships in all important dimensions—e.g., with all notable Asian, European, and Middle Eastern governments and private sectors, and with all of those countries’ important relationships with the other countries, etc. In other words, in order to think about the US-China relationship I have to think about the Saudi Arabia-US and the Saudi Arabia-China relationship and to that I have to think about the Saudi Arabia-Iran relationship, the Saudi Arabia-Israel, the Saudi Arabia-Egypt, and many other relationships in all of their important dimensions, plus the other analogous relationships. Without the aid of a good computer and a whole lot of data, it is impossible to follow, let alone understand, what’s going on. It is way beyond me, and frankly when I speak with world leaders I find it shocking how little they really understand what the others in this multidimensional chess game are really thinking.

### THE RISK OF UNNECESSARY WAR
**As I explained in Chapter 6, stupid wars often happen as a result of a tit-for-tat escalation process in which responding to even small actions of an adversary is more important than being perceived as weak, especially when those on both sides don’t really understand the motivations of those on the other side.** History shows us that this is especially a problem for declining empires, which tend to fight more than is logical because any retreat is seen as a defeat.

Take the issue of Taiwan. Even though the US fighting to defend Taiwan would seem to be illogical, not fighting a Chinese attack on Taiwan might be perceived as being a big loss of stature and power over other countries that won’t support the US if it doesn’t fight and win for its allies. Additionally, such defeats can make leaders look weak to their own people, which can cost them the political support they need to remain in power. And, of course, miscalculations due to misunderstandings when conflicts are transpiring quickly are dangerous. All these dynamics create strong pulls toward wars accelerating even though such mutually destructive wars are so much worse than cooperating and competing in more peaceful ways.

**There is also risk of untruthful, emotional rhetoric taking hold in both the US and China, creating an atmosphere for escalation.** For example, in a recent Pew survey a record 73 percent of Americans had an unfavorable opinion of China, 73 percent believed the United States should promote human rights in China, and 50 percent believed the US should “hold China responsible” for the role it played in COVID-19. Though I don’t have surveys of Chinese public opinion of the United States, I am told by many people that it has deteriorated. It wouldn’t take much to have these people demand accelerations of the conflicts.

**Ultimately, it would be wise for leaders and citizens of both countries to recognize that the US and China are in a competition of systems and abilities.** Each will inevitably follow the system that they believe works best for them, Americans have a slight lead in power but it is shrinking and they’re outnumbered, and history has shown that while numbers of people can matter a lot, other factors (e.g., the 18 determinants listed in Chapter 2) matter more, so even small-population empires become leading world powers if they manage themselves well. That all implies that what’s most important to being strong is how we act with ourselves.

### THE WAR WITH OURSELVES: THE ENEMY IS US
Our greatest war is with ourselves because we have the most control over how strong or weak we are. Because it is pretty clear what makes countries strong and weak, and because these strengths and weaknesses are measurable, it is easy to see how each country is doing. These factors were laid out in the first and second chapters and measured by 18 determinants. I will briefly review them here, and in the next and final part, I will show these determinants for most countries and will explore the leading indicators of them so that we can make projections of what’s to come.

**Before we do that, let’s review the specific items that help make a great empire. They are**…

… **leadership that is strong enough and capable enough to provide the essential ingredients for success**, which include…

… **strong education.** By strong education I don’t just mean teaching knowledge and skills; I also mean teaching…

… **strong character, civility, and a strong work ethic**, which are typically taught in the family as well as in school. These lead to improved civility that is reflected in factors such as…

… **low corruption and high respect for rules, such as the rule of law.**

… **People being able to work well together, united behind a common view of how they should be together**, is also important. When people have knowledge, skills, good character, and the civility to behave and work well together, and there is…

… **a good system for allocating resources**, which is significantly improved by…

… **being open to the best global thinking**, the country has the most important ingredients in order to succeed. That leads to it gaining…

… **greater competitiveness in global markets**, which brings in revenues that are greater than expenses, which leads the country to have…

… **strong income growth**, which allows it to make…

… **increased investments to improve infrastructure, education, and research and development**, which lead it to have…

… **rapidly increasing productivity** (more valuable output per hour worked). Increasing productivity is what increases wealth and productive capabilities. When the country achieves higher productivity levels, it can become productive inventors in…

… **new technologies.** These new technologies are valuable for both commerce and the military. As the country becomes more competitive in these ways, naturally it gains…

… **a rising and significant share of world trade**, which requires it to have…

… **a strong military** to protect its trade routes and to influence those who are important to them outside their borders. In becoming economically preeminent the country develops…

… **strong and widely used currency, equity, and credit markets.** Naturally those dominant in trade and capital flows have their currency used much more as the preferred global medium of exchange and the preferred storehold of wealth, which leads to **their currency becoming a reserve currency** and the building of…

… **at least one of the world’s leading financial centers** for attracting and distributing capital and expanding their trade globally.

**Whatever makes these measures go up is good and whatever makes them go down is bad. For this reason it is wise for citizens of all countries to ask themselves how well they collectively and their leaders are doing at making the lines in these measures go up. I also hope that they will remember the cause/effect relationships, avoiding the excesses and divisions that lead to declines.**

**As for the case at hand, the internal wars and challenges in both China and the US are more important and bigger than external wars and challenges.** These include political wars within the leadership of the country and at all levels of government, wars between different factions (e.g., the rich and the poor, the rural and the urban, conservatives and progressives, ethnic groups, etc.), demographic changes, climate change, etc. Fortunately, the most important of these forces are within our control and are measurable, which allows us to see how we are doing and, if we’re not doing well, to make changes so these things move in the right directions. **By and large we will get what we deserve. As Churchill said to the British people, “Deserve Victory!”**

1 Decoupling, while required given the circumstances, will be difficult and will lead to significantly reduced efficiency. China’s main program for building self-sufficiency goes under the name of “dual circulation.” One knowledgeable party described it as a compartmented rather than a broad-based decoupling, which makes sense to me.

2 One in five North America-based companies in a 2019 CNBC Global CFO Council survey claimed to have had intellectual property stolen by Chinese companies.

3 It is widely recognized that “regime change” has been commonly employed by the United States for managing its world order.

4 This statement was made in connection with the Taiwan reunification issue.

5 The shares of dollar-denominated debt are large in relation to a) the percentage of asset allocations that international investors would hold to balance their portfolios well, b) the sizes of reserve currency holdings that are appropriate to meet trade and capital flow funding needs, and c) the size and importance of the US economy relative to other economies. Dollar-denominated debt is now disproportionately large because the dollar is the world’s leading reserve currency, which means it is perceived as a safer asset than it really is, and because dollar borrowings have been disproportionately large. Now most of those who are responsible for determining what the shares of their holdings should be in different markets are not inclined to increase the shares in line with the greater amounts of US bonds to be sold and are in fact considering reducing their shares held in US debt, which, if it happens, will require larger purchases by the Federal Reserve.

6 This data is adjusted for purchasing power parity.

7 In fact, it is a challenge for the Chinese to deal with the lack of continuity of policies and directions in the US arising from seemingly whimsical shifts in what matters to the American public as expressed in whom they choose to represent them.